European Heart Journal (2021) 42, 3114-3121
doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab167

Bertalan Mesko

1,2

*

1
The Medical Futurist Institute, Povl Bang-Jensen u. 2/B1. 4/1, 1118 Budapest, Hungary; and 2Department of Behavioural Sciences, Semmelweis University, Nagyvarad ter 4, 1089
Budapest, Hungary

Introduction
The 21st century has seen major changes in the practice of medicine
and the delivery of healthcare through a cultural transformation we
call digital health.1 This generation of patients comes with a desire for
an equal-level partnership between them and their medical professionals; as well as for a change in the roles of the old status quo.
The role of the passive patient has been transforming into a proactive role being eager to get involved with their health and disease management. Physicians' role of being the key holder to the ivory tower of
medicine has been transforming into the role of a guide for their
patients in the network of information and technologies (Figure 1).
In all this, cardiology has been a prominent example about how the
use of advanced technologies, digital health, and automation could
shape the future of a medical specialty. Several reasons underscore
this notion.
1. The leading cause of death worldwide is ischaemic heart disease, responsible for 16% of deaths, according to the WHO. Since 2000, this disease
has seen the largest increase in the number of deaths rising by >2-8.9
million deaths in 2019.
2. Many of the most popular digital health devices on the market measure
vital signs and health parameters related to circulation.
3. Most conditions cardiologists deal with require the active engagement of
patients on the long term.

The COVID-19 pandemic has emphasized these reasons even
more. The pandemic has led to a faster adoption of digital health technologies; made telemedicine the main way of providing care in many
areas; and accelerated the process of shifting the point-of-care from
hospital buildings and practices to wherever patients are.2
This way, by envisioning how these factors shape the future of this
medical specialty, cardiology could also pave the way for medical professionals in other fields by helping them better understand what
awaits them.

The rise of digital health devices
A swarm of technologies have become available globally in less than a
decade (Figure 2). Digital blood pressure monitors, hand-held

electocardiogram (ECG) devices, heart rate and motion trackers, and
smartwatches have become accessible to the masses. Combined, portable diagnostic devices have been developed that can measure multiple vital signs and health parameters at once with built-in algorithms
that can also immediately analyse the results.
Millions of patients have started taking direct-to-consumer genetic
tests to learn about their risks for major heart conditions; medication
sensitivity for a range of drugs used in those conditions and even doing
microbiome tests to optimize their diet.
This trend has also reached cardiologists in their daily profession
through digital stethoscopes, portable ultrasound devices, algorithms
analysing medical images, and in the design of treatment pathways. At
least five artificial intelligence (AI)-based technologies have been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in cardiology.3 Examples include Arterys for analysing cardiovascular images
from magnetic resonance; ECG analysis support and Eko's cardiac
monitor. Dozens of other technologies have received CE approval for
their use in cardiology.
It seems clear that automation in analysing patients' data and decision support will have a growing role in the job of cardiologists. There
is an influx of data coming from patients that add to the vast amount of
information they already deal with at the point-of-care. At the same
time, the access to information and technologies allows patients dealing with cardiovascular issues to get more involved in their care.
Both trends in themselves would lead to significant changes in how
cardiologists do their job, but, together, the transformation of the
medical practice in general is inevitable.

A vision about the future of
cardiology
In 2032, 44-year-old Linda living in the London suburbs decides that
she wants to change her lifestyle by running half an hour a few times a
week. As she has no experience in doing regular exercises, she chooses a fitness wearable measuring vital signs and other health data to accompany her on the journey.
After a few sessions, the device starts sending alerts about detecting
an abnormal heart rate and irregularities in her ECG. She uses a

* Corresponding author. Email: berci@medicalfuturist.com
C The Author(s) 2021. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. V

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/33/3114/6181768 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

A glimpse into the future of cardiology:
how can advanced technologies lead to
compassionate care?

Cardiopulse

3115

Figure 2 Examples of digital health devices and sensors focusing on vital signs and health parameters related to circulation. The coloured dots next
to each device represent on which body part those have to be used.

chatbot on her phone based on AI to advise her what to do with it.
The chatbot suggests sharing the data and the notifications with her
primary care physicians who advises her to see a cardiologist.
The cardiologist uses an algorithm trained in machine learning to
provide a prediction score for how Linda's case might evolve. The algorithm has access to the data of millions of patients and every decision it makes is confirmed by a physician to further improve its
efficiency. Linda received a more advanced device that is continuously
connected to her cardiologist's dashboard to make sure she is being
monitored properly and to help decide on preventive treatment. Since

the emerging symptoms were already noticed long before anything
major could happen, Linda keeps on running without the fear that she
might have a heart condition.
The final decision always belongs to the cardiologist who suddenly
has two new members in the medical team: the patient and AI. While
this promise could raise fear or doubt for some about how this might
work out, hopefully, the rest will only see what matters: a patient
avoiding a heart incident, a physician enjoying their profession, and a
healthcare system becoming more efficient through a new equal-level
partnership.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/33/3114/6181768 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 1 Depictions of the traditional setting of a doctor-patient meeting (left) and the new setting characterized by an equal-level partnership, access to data that come from patients and medical professionals, and the shared use of advanced technologies (right).

3116
This is the promise of digital health. With its unique position in the
palette of medical specialties, cardiology could be a leading example
paving the road for others in how to adopt advanced technologies
while focusing on the real-life relationships they can build with patients
through compassionate care.
Conflict of interest: none declared.

Cardiopulse

References
1. Mesk
o B, Drobni Z, Benyei 
E, Gergely B, Gy}
orffy Z. Digital health is a cultural transformation of traditional healthcare. mHealth 2017;3:38-38.
2. Sust PP, Solans O, Fajardo JC, Peralta MM, Rodenas P, Gabalda J, et alet al Turning
the crisis into an opportunity: digital health strategies deployed during the COVID19 outbreak. J Med Internet Res 2020;22.
3. Benjamens S, Dhunnoo P, Mesk
o B. The state of artificial intelligence-based FDA-approved medical devices and algorithms: an online database. NPJ Digit Med
2020;3:1-8.

The need for ethical and pragmatic strategies
for sample and data collection during public
health emergencies-minimizing missed
opportunities
Rafael Escandon1 and Bettina Heidecker

2

*

1

BridgeBio Gene Therapy, San Francisco, CA, USA; and 2Campus Benjamin Franklin, Charite UniversitEURatsmedizin Berlin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12203 Berlin, Germany

What the COVID-19 pandemic has
revealed to clinical researchers

Lost samples during the first peak
of the COVID-19 pandemic

The magnitude of the success in vaccine and countermeasure research
to address the pandemic of SARS-CoV-2 in 2020 cannot be overstated.1 Within a short period of time, the international community
teamed up to address one of the greatest challenges in history, leading
to unprecedented achievements such as 'Project Lightspeed',2,3 in
which a highly efficient vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 was developed
within months. In parallel, other investigators and companies developed with great efficiency successful vaccines and therapies against
SARS-CoV-2, trying to meet the high demand for protection of our society and for return to 'normal' life.4,5
While these great successes received extensive media coverage,
other scientists have faced challenges due to delayed institutional
approvals of their COVID-19 research projects.
Certainly, the role of the ethics committee in ensuring the balance
between scientific progress and the protection of patients' rights, privacy, and clinical care is of utmost importance. While the review of a
research project application by an ethics committee frequently takes
several months during 'normal times', this delay may lead to avoidable
loss of valuable samples and data during an outbreak of a pandemic.
Time is of the essence for the research community during a pandemic
as scientists race to elucidate the pathophysiology of the disease and
provide guidance to those designing potentially lifesaving public policies. A new pragmatic balance between regulation and productivity in
science must be found in such scenarios.
In this article, we suggest a two-step consent algorithm, in which we
separate the institutional approval process for sample acquisition from
the approval process of sample analysis, allowing sample collection to
start immediately during an outbreak of a public health emergency.

Our motivation for writing this article arose from anecdotal evidence
of missed opportunities during the first peak of the COVID-19 pandemic observed by our international colleagues and by ourselves. In
this small-scale collection of data, we found that, on average, 70% of
COVID-19 minimal-risk biosamples such as blood or plasma could not
be collected during the first wave of the pandemic and were therefore
lost due to delays in approvals across many institutions. These delays
were caused by an overwhelming number of applications to the ethics
committees by investigators aiming to study COVID-19.6 The lost
samples could have potentially provided insights into the pathophysiologic mechanisms of COVID-19 in spring 2020 to better prepare the
public and clinical facilities for the second peak in autumn 2020.
The increased volume of applications required institutions to adjust
their review and approval practices.6 While ethical decisions on investigational trials are complex and require a comprehensive and often
lengthy review, we suggest a simple and time-efficient approach during
a public health crisis for studies that are solely analytical.
Early analytical and observational studies are highly relevant as they
seek to generate a better understanding of the pathophysiology of a
novel disease such as COVID-19 and to improve diagnosis and risk assessment.6 In that regard, relevant discoveries had been made in analytical studies concerning the nature of COVID-19, active viral
replication of SARS-CoV-2 in the respiratory tract, and how this affects
infectivity of patients during the course of the illness.7 Those findings
had a relevant impact on public health procedures.
Given the importance of analytical studies, the low health risk they
pose to patients, and the observed delays in their approval process, we
suggest a two-step consent process that separates sample collection

*Corresponding author. Tel: th49 30 450 513 736, Fax: th49 30 450 513 999, Email: bettina.heidecker@charite.de

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/33/3114/6181768 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab102


