2145

CardioPulse

Expert comment: Jeanette
Erdmann PhD

Germany and is known for her investigative work into the underlying
genetic factors of cardiovascular disease and myocardial infarction to
develop novel therapeutic targets.
'It's not only in cardiovascular research that CRISPR has opened up
a whole new avenue of applications. Experimentally, we can now systematically interrogate the influence of non-coding variants we have
identified in the past decade by genome-wide association studies, for
example, by generating cell culture models into which we introduce
the variant under investigation using CRISPR and then study whether
this change is functionally effective. Importantly, these studies can also
be done in a large-scale setting allowing us to study thousands of variants simultaneously. But CRISPR plays an even more important role
when it comes to possible therapies. Firstly, CRISPR allows the establishment of urgently needed disease models necessary for the development of novel therapeutics approaches. And secondly, in the not so far
future, we might use CRISPR to tackle other cardiovascular risk genes
apart from PCSK9 to reduce cholesterol'.
Conflict of interest: none declared.

Judy Ozkan, MA
j.ozkan@btinternet.com

Jeanette Erdmann is Professor of Cardiogenetics and Director of the
Institute for Cardiogenetics (ICG) at the University of Lubeck,

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab033

Antiplatelet and direct oral anticoagulation
management after coronary artery bypass graft
surgery: the Cinderella of current cardiovascular
trials, please show me (some) evidence
Felix Schoenrath 1,2+, Isabell Anna Just1,2+, Volkmar Falk
Maximilian Y. Emmert 1,3,5*

1,3,4

, and

1

Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, German Heart Center Berlin, Berlin, Germany;; 2DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site Berlin,
Berlin, Germany;; 3Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Charite-UniversitEURatsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie UniversitEURat Berlin, Humboldt-UniversitEURat Berlin, and
Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany;; 4Department of Health Sciences, Translational Cardiovascular Technologies, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; and; and 5Institute for
Regenerative Medicine (IREM), University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

Introduction
Even today, it remains unclear whether an intensification of platelet inhibition or anticoagulant therapy is beneficial when added to the standard therapy with acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) after coronary artery
bypass graft (CABG) surgery.
The literature shows clear evidence supporting dual antiplatelet
therapy (DAPT) in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS), especially after coronary stent implantation or on medical treatment

*Corresponding author. Tel: th49 30 4593 2030, Email: emmert@dhzb.de
+
The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

alone, as well as in patients with stable coronary artery disease (CAD)
after coronary interventions, unless there is an indication for full-dose
anticoagulation or an elevated bleeding risk. DAPT with ASA plus clopidogrel or ticagrelor after CABG surgery decreases the incidence of
bypass graft failures and might protect against recurrent ischaemic
events in off-pump surgical strategies or after coronary endarterectomy. Concerning graft patency, there is strong evidence that ASA
prevents early occlusion and increases long-term graft survival. Based
on some data from subgroup analyses of randomized controlled ACS

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/22/2145/6146041 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

problems facing humanity whether they be in biomedicine or in agriculture and importantly to do that with an eye towards accessibility,
sustainability, and affordability that will make the technology go from a
lab tool to a standard of care some day in genetic disease or a way to
create the kind of changes in agricultural products to meet the challenges of climate change, and so much more'.
The Nobel Prize was announced during an online ceremony in
Stockholm. Claes Gustafsson reiterated the enormous implications-
current and future of the discovery and said how it had revolutionized
biomedical science and enabled the 'dream to cure' genetic diseases.
He did, however, note with caution that the enormous power of this
technology means it should be used with caution and great care must
be taken regarding the ethical framework in which it is employed.
The two women share the prize fund of KR 10 000, a place in scientific history and will receive their awards at a future date as the traditional Nobel Week celebrations which take place in Stockholm in the
December following the prize announcements have been cancelled
for 2020 due to the ongoing CV19 pandemic.

2146

CardioPulse

acute coronary syndrome; ASA, acetylsalicylic acid; b.i.d., twice daily; CAD, coronary artery disease; DAPT, dual antiplatelet therapy; DPI, dual pathway
inhibition; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; LV-EF, left ventricular ejection fraction. *Patients post-ACS and if DAPT was well tolerated for 12 months.

trials, DAPT is associated with reduced mortality and improved vein
graft patency.1,2
For decades, anticoagulation with vitamin K antagonists (VKA) was
the therapy of choice in patients with coexisting atrial fibrillation (AF)
and stable CAD due to its beneficial stroke prevention and antiischaemic potential comparable to combination therapy with ASA and
VKA, but with a significantly lower bleeding risk.3 In recent years, an
anticoagulation strategy with low-dose direct oral anticoagulants was
tested in large-scale randomized trials, which confirmed that some
patients with ACS or stable CAD benefit from dual pathway inhibition
(DPI) by combining coagulation factor Xa inhibition and ASA
(NCT00809965, NCT00831441, NCT01776424).
It remains an important clinical question whether this strategy is
applicable in patients after CABG surgery, and if so, whether the
benefits outweigh the increased risk of bleeding. Moreover, it is
desirable to define the clinical setting in which patients may benefit the most, especially with regard to patients in whom DAPT is
indicated, according to the aforementioned scenarios. Although
the European Medicines Agency (EMA) has approved a DPI regimen in patients who are at high risk of a recurrent thrombotic
event after ACS, evidence from trials addressing a surgical cohort
is scarce (EMEA/H/C/005279).

Dual pathway inhibition
pathophysiology
The concept of combined antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy was
derived from molecular and cellular models of coronary atherogenesis.
An atherosclerotic plaque rupture triggers platelet activation and an
exposure of tissue factor, which is known to activate the coagulation
cascade. Both mechanisms of arterial thrombus formation are medically addressed by the DPI strategy: ASA irreversibly inactivates the cyclooxygenase enzymes, leading to a reduced production of the
prothrombotic thromboxane A2 and hereby inhibiting platelet activation, and the direct coagulation factor Xa inhibitor interrupts the coagulation cascade, consequently blocking thrombin and fibrin formation.4

Dual pathway inhibition trials
In the ATLAS ACS2-TIMI51 trial, 15 526 patients received the direct
factor Xa inhibitor rivaroxaban [2.5 or 5 mg twice daily (b.i.d.)] or placebo in addition to standard therapy with ASA alone (7%) or as addon to a combination of ASA and clopidogrel (93%) within 1 week after
ACS. None of the participants received a more potent P2Y12 inhibitor

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/22/2145/6146041 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 1 The current state of evidence on postoperative antiplatelet and anticoagulation therapy in coronary artery bypass graft surgery.1,3 ACS,

2147

CardioPulse

authors discussed that this might be due to the low power of the substudy, since the COMPASS trial was stopped early and not all patients
underwent CTA. In concordance with these results, in a previous study
from 1997, anticoagulation with low-dose warfarin (mean international
normalized ratio 1.4) failed to reduce long-term graft failure.8

Conclusions
The data on DPI after CABG surgery in patients with ACS or with stable
CAD are limited: The size of the ACS cohort managed by surgical revascularization remained undefined and the time of starting or re-starting
DPI after surgery was presumably too late to prevent early graft failures,
since these commonly occur within the first days to weeks after surgery.9,10 Additionally, DPI has never been compared to a DAPT strategy
with a more potent P2Y12 inhibitor than clopidogrel in either an ACS
cohort or a stable CAD cohort. Furthermore, DPI after elective CABG
surgery has not been investigated in patients with a reduced LV-EF
<30% or NYHA functional class III or IV symptoms. Figure 1 summarizes
the current state of evidence on DPI after cardiac surgery.
Taking the available evidence, with all its limitations for a surgical cohort, and the promising underlying pathophysiological concept into account, we suggest carefully considering DPI treatment in patients after
elective CABG surgery with an LV-EF >35%. This is valid under the assumption that the bleeding risk is low and the risk of recurrent ischaemic events is elevated, especially in patients with more severe
atherosclerosis and diabetes. Overall, further in-depth research assessing the adequate and safe time of DPI initialization after CABG surgery
and its potential to prevent early graft failure is urgently needed.
Conflict of interest: F.S. receives remuneration, consultancy fees
and/or travel support from Medtronic GmbH, Abbott GmbH & Co.
KG, Cardiorentis AG. V.F. has relevant (institutional) financial activities
outside the summited work with following commercial entities:
Medtronic GmbH, Biotronik SE & Co., Abbott GmbH & Co. KG,
Boston Scientific, Edwards Lifesciences, Berlin Heart, Novartis Pharma
GmbH, JOT EC GmbH and Zurich Heart in relation to educational
grants (including travel support), fees for lectures and speeches, fees for
professional consultation and research and study funds.

References
1. Valgimigli M, Bueno H, Byrne RA, Collet J-P, Costa F, Jeppsson A, Juni P, Kastrati A,
Kolh P, Mauri L, Montalescot G, Neumann F-J, Petricevic M, Roffi M, Steg PG,
Windecker S, Zamorano JL, Levine GN; ESC Scientific Document Group; ESC
Committee for Practical Guidelines (CPG); ESC National Cardiac Societies. 2017 ESC
focused update on dual antiplatelet therapy in coronary artery disease developed in
collaboration with EACTS: the task force for dual antiplatelet therapy in coronary artery disease of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and of the European
Association for Cardio-Throacic Surgery (EACTS). Eur Heart J 2018;39:213-260.
2. Sousa-Uva M, Head SJ, Milojevic M, Collet JP, Landoni G, Castella M, Dunning J,
Gudbjartsson T, Linker NJ, Sandoval E, Thielmann M, Jeppsson A, Landmesser U.
2017 EACTS guidelines on perioperative medication in adult cardiac surgery. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg 2018;53:5-33.
3. Knuuti J, Wijns W, Saraste A, Capodanno D, Barbato E, Funck-Brentano C,
Prescott E, Storey RF, Deaton C, Cuisset T, Agewall S, Dickstein K, Edvardsen T,
Escaned J, Gersh BJ, Svitil P, Gilard M, Hasdai D, Hatala R, Mahfoud F, Masip J,
Muneretto C, Valgimigli M, Achenbach S, Bax JJ; ESC Scientific Document Group.
2019 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and management of chronic coronary syndromes. Eur Heart J 2020;41:407-477.
4. Swieringa F, Spronk HMH, Heemskerk JWM, van der Meijden PEJ. Integrating
platelet and coagulation activation in fibrin clot formation. Res Pract Thromb
Haemost 2018;2:450-460.
5. Gibson CM, Mega JL, Burton P, Goto S, Verheugt F, Bode C, Plotnikov A, Sun X, CookBruns N, Braunwald E. Rationale and design of the Anti-Xa therapy to lower cardiovascular events in addition to standard therapy in subjects with acute coronary syndrome-thrombolysis in myocardial infarction 51 (ATLAS-ACS2 TMI51) trial: a

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/22/2145/6146041 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

(ticagrelor, prasugrel) in a DAPT or DPI regimen. In the combined
rivaroxaban groups, the composite of major adverse cardiovascular
events (MACE), defined as cardiovascular death, myocardial infarction,
and stroke, was reduced by 16% (P  1/4  0.008) at the cost of an increase
in major bleeding, but with no increase in fatal bleeding compared to
placebo. The very low rivaroxaban dose (2.5 mg b.i.d.) also showed reduced mortality rates (P  1/4  0.002) (NCT00809965).
Approximately 60% of ACS patients underwent revascularization
by either percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or CABG surgery.
The proportion of patients with CABG surgery has not been published
and no subgroup analysis addressing the efficacy of DPI in preventing
primary graft failure has been performed yet. In the case of nonemergency indications and randomization before revascularization, the
study drug (rivaroxaban or placebo) was stopped 12 h before CABG
surgery and was restarted after postoperative recovery, when no ongoing bleeding risk was assumed.5
A previous, similar trial underlined the importance of administering a
low dose of the anticoagulant in the DPI regimen: The direct factor Xa inhibitor apixaban at a full therapeutic dose of 5 mg b.i.d., as given in AF, led
to excessive major bleeding including intracranial haemorrhage when
combined with ASA in an early post-ACS cohort. The participants were
mainly treated by medical therapy only (55.6%) or by PCI (43.8%). The
trial was terminated early for safety reasons. There was no reduction in
MACE or mortality in the 7392 participants recruited (NCT00831441).
The combination of full-dose anticoagulation and a highly potent
P2Y12 inhibitor (ticagrelor, prasugrel) has been studied in patients
with AF undergoing PCI; dual or triple antithrombotic strategies with a
vitamin K antagonist have been associated with significantly higher
rates of clinically relevant haemorrhagic complications and should
therefore be avoided according to the current guidelines.6 The combination of rivaroxaban and ticagrelor is currently under investigation
(CAPITOL PCI AF trial, NCT03331484).
In the COMPASS trial, more than 27 000 patients with stable cardiovascular diseases were randomized to ASA alone, rivaroxaban 5 mg b.i.d.
alone, or rivaroxaban 2.5 mg b.i.d. combined with ASA. Compared to
ASA alone, DPI was associated with a reduction in the composite of
MACE by 24% (4.1% vs. 5.4%; P < 0.001) and a reduction in mortality
(3.4% vs. 4.1%; P  1/4  0.01) at the cost of an increase in major bleeding, defined as any bleeding that led to presentation to an acute care facility or
to hospitalization (3.1% vs. 1.9%; P < 0.001). Fatal or critical organ bleeding was not increased (NCT01776424). Patients with a left ventricular
ejection fraction (LV-EF) of less than 30% or New York Heart
Association (NYHA) functional class III or IV symptoms were excluded
from the investigation on the basis of the results of the COMMANDERHF trial.7 Here, a very low dose of rivaroxaban (2.5 mg b.i.d.) in addition
to standard antiplatelet therapy (ASA or DAPT) was not superior to placebo at preventing MACE (25.0% vs. 26.2%; P  1/4  0.27) or mortality in
5022 patients with CAD and chronic heart failure (LV-EF  40%) who
had not undergone concurrent revascularization (NCT01877915).
A pre-planned sub-study of the COMPASS trial analysed whether DPI
is effective in preventing graft failure and MACE after CABG surgery. A total of 1448 patients were randomized within 4-14 days after implantation
of at least two bypass grafts. Compared to ASA alone the combined therapy reduced the composite of MACE (2.4% vs. 3.5%; P  1/4  0.34) nonsignificantly, but in line with the results of the larger COMPASS trial. DPI
failed to reduce graft failures (9.1% vs. 8.0%; odds ratio 1.13; 95% confidence interval 0.82-1.57; P  1/4  0.45), which were diagnosed by a computed
tomography angiogram (CTA) 1 year after surgery (NCT01776424). The

2148

8. Post Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Trial Investigators. The effect of aggressive
lowering of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and low-dose anticoagulation on obstructive changes in saphenous-vein coronary-artery bypass grafts. N
Engl J Med 1997;336:153-162.
9. Laflamme M, DeMey N, Bouchard D, Carrier M, Demers P, Pellerin M, Couture P,
Perrault LP. Management of early postoperative coronary artery bypass graft failure. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2012;14:452-456.
10. Caliskan E, de Souza DR, Boning A, Liakopoulos OJ, Choi Y-H, Pepper J, Gibson CM,
Perrault LP, Wolf RK, Kim K-B, Emmert MY. Saphenous vein grafts in contemporary
coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Nat Rev Cardiol 2020;17:155-169.

Corresponding author
Maximilian Y. Emmert, MD, Phd
German Heart Center Berlin,
Berlin, Germany
emmert@dhzb.de

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab032

Introduction to the Department of Cardiology
in West China Hospital of Sichuan University
History and current status of West
China Hospital
The history of West China Hospital (WCH), situated at the city of
Chengdu and affiliated with Sichuan University, can be traced back to
the Renji and Cunren Hospital founded by missionaries from America
and Canada in 1892. It became an epicentre for thriving of academic excellence and nurturing of medical talents in China during World War II,
when renowned universities and colleges in war-afflicted area moved to
take cover in the west. WCH has now become a leading medical centre
in China, with 4300 beds and 5.7 million outpatient visits annually
(Figure 1). WCH ranks No. 2 in the Best Hospital in China Rankings
(2009-2019), and ranks No. 1 in the Science and Technology Evaluation
Metrics (STEM) Rankings for Chinese Hospitals (2014-2019).
The Department of Cardiology, founded by Professor Luo Decheng
in 1954, is now designated as a state key clinical specialty and the only
state-qualified training centre for cardiac interventional therapeutics in
Sichuan Province. The Department has 185 beds, one coronary care
unit, and nine Cath Labs. The Department performs many percutaneous procedures to treat patients in need. Acknowledging the great potential of transcatheter valve interventions, the Department was
devoted to promoting the technique in China during the past decade.
Currently, the Department has developed as a leading centre of transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) in China, in terms of both
quality of care and academic reputation.

The heart valve team
The multidisciplinary heart valve team of WCH strives to provide
patient-oriented care (Figure 2). The team was founded by Professor
Mao Chen in 2012, when TAVI had gained worldwide acceptance.
However, promoting TAVI in China was encountered with enormous
challenges, primarily due to the different aortic valve anatomy and the
lack of commercially available devices. Approximately 40% of TAVI

candidates in China have a bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) and 1020%
have non-calcific leaflets, both had been considered as relative contraindications for TAVI. Besides, many patients in China are in critical status when sought care, making the procedure even more challenging.
By cooperating with leading valve centres and domestic manufacturers,
the team was able to help solve some key problems that had impeded
TAVI development in China.

Clinical research on transcatheter
aortic valve implantation in
bicuspid anatomy
BAV is frequently associated with eccentric annulus, 'volcano-shaped'
leaflet configuration, and asymmetrical valve calcification. These unfavourable anatomical features pose significant challenges for TAVI, with
increased risk of elliptical deployment and prosthetic valve dysfunction.
However, given the high incidence, BAV is an inevitable problem for
TAVI implanters in China. To date, the team has treated approximately
500 patients with BAV by TAVI. Incorporating their preliminary experience, the team comprehensively reviewed the safety and efficacy of
TAVI in BAV in a paper published in Nature Reviews Cardiology in 2014.
The paper proposed technical strategies for optimal outcomes and
pointed out the knowledge gap for future research.
To optimize patient selection, the team cooperated with Professor
Hasan Jilaihawi from NYU Langone Medical Center and proposed a
simplified and novel classification of BAV for TAVI which categorized
BAV as tricommissural, bicommissural raphe type, and bicommissural
non-raphe type. Such classification better reflects the interaction between prosthesis and the aortic-valvular complex and provides informative guidance for procedural workup.
Another tricky issue was prosthetic valve sizing for BAV. The team
proposed a novel sizing technique widely known as supra-annular sizing along with Professor Nicolo Piazza from McGill University Health
Center, Canada. The concept derived from an observation of the

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/22/2145/6146041 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of
rivaroxaban in subjects with acute coronary syndrome. Am Heart J 2011;161:815-821.
6. Hindricks G, Potpara T, Dagres N, Arbelo E, Bax JJ, Blomstrom-Lundqvist C, Boriani G,
Castella M, Dan GA, Dilaveris PE, Fauchier L, Filippatos G, Kalman JM, La Meir M, Lane
DA, Lebeau JP, Lettino M, Lip GYH, Pinto FJ, Thomas GN, Valgimigli M, Van Gelder IC,
Van Putte BP, Watkins CL; ESC Scientific Document Group. 2020 ESC guidelines for
the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation developed in collaboration with the
European Association of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS). Eur Heart J
2020;doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa612.
7. Bosch J, Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, Bruns NC, Lanius V, Yuan F, Misselwitz F, Chen E,
Diaz R, Alings M, Lonn EM, Widimsky P, Hori M, Avezum A, Piegas LS, Bhatt DL,
Branch KRH, Probstfield JL, Liang Y, Liu L, Zhu J, Maggioni AP, Lopez-Jaramillo P,
O'Donnell M, Fox KAA, Kakkar A, Parkhomenko AN, Ertl G, Stork S, Keltai K, Keltai
M, Ryden L, Dagenais GR, Pogosova N, Dans AL, Lanas F, Commerford PJ, TorpPedersen C, Guzik TJ, Verhamme PB, Vinereanu D, Kim J-H, Ha J-W, Tonkin AM,
Varigos JD, Lewis BS, Felix C, Yusoff K, Steg PG, Aboyans V, Metsarinne KP, Anand SS,
Hart RG, Lamy A, Moayyedi P, Leong DP, Sharma M, Yusuf S. Rationale, design and
baseline characteristics of participants in the Cardiovascular OutcoMes for People
Using Anticoagulation Strategies (COMPASS) trial. Can J Cardiol 2017;33:1027-1035.

CardioPulse


