3410

Cardiovascular flashlight

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa886
Online publish-ahead-of-print 21 October 2020

CARDIOVASCULAR FLASHLIGHT

....................................................................................................................................................

Aortic intimo-intimal intussusception in Stanford type A acute aortic
dissection
Aleksander Dokollari1, Matteo Cameli2, Louie Wang3, and Gianluigi Bisleri
1

4

*

2

* Corresponding author. Tel: 11-613-548-3232 ext 2422; Email: gianluigi.bisleri@queensu.ca

A 73-year-old male was admitted for
transient right-side weakness. On
examination, there was a 5/6 holodiastolic murmur on the aortic area.
A Stanford type A aortic dissection
was diagnosed with intimo-medial
flap formation originating from the
sinuses of Valsalva/sinotubular junction and extending to the ascending
aorta, the aortic arch, the left subclavian artery, and the descending aorta.
Radiological imaging revealed extensive intimal stripping with intimointimal intussusception in the left
ventricular outflow tract (LVOT).
Distally, the dissection affected the
perfusion of the right renal artery
and extended down to the external
iliac vessels bilaterally. The patient was therefore referred for urgent surgical treatment: intraoperatively, transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed a Stanford type A aortic dissection with intimo-intimal intussusception of the aortic layers and protrusion into the LVOT
leading to torrential aortic valve regurgitation (Supplementary material online, Video S1 and Panel). Given the extensive involvement of all
potential peripheral sites for arterial cannulation (including the right and left axillary artery, the brachiocephalic trunk as well as both femoral
arteries), a decision was taken to perform direct cannulation of the ascending aorta via the Seldinger technique (Supplementary material
online, Video S2): in particular, the mid-portion of the ascending aorta was cannulated since it did not present the usual double-lumen
appearance (as a consequence of the intimal intussusception in the LVOT) but only the true lumen was present in such segment; proper
position of the guidewire in the true lumen was confirmed by transoesophageal echocardiography. Replacement of the ascending aorta and
hemiarch with resuspension of the aortic valve was performed with sparing of the aortic root and mild residual aortic regurgitation
(Supplementary material online, Video S3).
Pre-operative transoesophageal echocardiography evidencing the intimo-intimal intussusception.
Supplementary material is available at European Heart Journal online.
Ethical standards: The authors claim that all the surgical procedures contributing to this manuscript comply with the ethical standards of
the relevant national guidelines on human experimentation and the Helsinki Declaration of 1975.
Conflict of interest: The authors have submitted their declaration which can be found in the article Supplementary Material online.
C The Author(s) 2020. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. V

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/34/3410/5934735 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Division of Cardiac Surgery, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada; Division of Cardiology, Le Scotte Hospital, University of Siena, Italy; 3Department of
Anesthesiology, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada; and 4Division of Cardiac Surgery, Queen's University, Victory 3 - Kingston General Hospital, 76 Stuart St,
Kingston, ON K7L2V7, Canada


