European Heart Journal (2021) 42, 2321-2330
doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab036

Artificial Intelligence in Global Health

Figure 1 Within the field of medicine and global health, artificial intelligence can be classified into four categories; (1) machine learning
models, (2) deep learning models; (3) natural language processing; (4)
artificial intelligence-driven clinical decision support systems. By combining these powerful artificial intelligence techniques with physical
technologies, such as cloud computing, drones, medical robots, and
mobile health, a new form of precision global health can emerge in
this digital evolution era.

areas of physician shortage. Natural language processing analysis of social media postings can be used to identify potential risk factors for
medical conditions such as diabetes (e.g. tweeted/retweeted/liked
pages regarding candy, high-sugar beverages) and gastric cancer (e.g.
liked Facebook/Instagram pages related to tobacco products). Other
potential uses include the detection and tracking of infectious disease
outbreaks through social media postings or identifying high-risk groups
for vaccine non-compliance based on social media activity. Natural language processing can also be applied for translating complex medication instructions (e.g. oral contraceptive pills for teenagers) to help
educate patients with poor health literacy, particularly in remote areas
or areas with scarce medical resources. Startup companies, such as
Sensory TrulyNatural (Santa Clara, CA, USA), are currently using NLP
for speech recognition on cloud-based devices that can be used in remote areas for a variety of global health interventions.
A concept termed 'computer vision' is defined as the ability of a machine to see, analyze, and interpret images or videos that mimics a
human's natural visual process. Computer vision can be used for the
remote diagnosis of various medical conditions using imaging data. For
example using computer vision for the diagnosis of malaria based on

C The Author(s) 2021. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. V

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/24/2321/6127595 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Recently, emerging technology such as the mobile health Pokemon Go
trial designed for increasing physical activity or the Apple Heart Study
for atrial fibrillation detection may help redefine the delivery of precision global health. In the era of big data, artificial intelligence (AI) has
been described as 'the fourth industrial revolution', or 'industry 4.0',
which could potentially allow for the development of the aforementioned precision global health. Since the beginning of the COVID-19
pandemic, the world has entered an era of digital evolution, as employees of virtually all business and global health-related systems started
working remotely. This change served to further emphasize the important role that AI may play in the digital evolution of global health, echoing the changes seen with the introduction of public internet in the
1990s. By combining these powerful AI techniques with physical technologies, a new form of precision global health can emerge in this digital evolution era (Figure 1).
Through our prior research efforts, we have described machine
learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) through the utilization of big data
and how these tools may be used to accurately predict outcomes.
Recent advancement of the DL model, such as Generative Pre-trained
Transformer 3 (GPT-3), can produce human-like text and potentially
advance human communications. Although GPT-3 is far from being capable of performing clinically meaningful tasks (e.g. medical diagnosis,
predicting outcomes of clinical trials), GPT-3 can assist physicians in repetitive tasks (e.g. scheduling, triage, public health intervention, billing
codes, note writing for uncomplicated visits) and basic telehealth (e.g.
PHQ-2 screening). Combining these models with augmented reality
platforms or robotic agents in resource-poor areas, for example, can
be utilized to increase vaccination rates (e.g. drone delivered COVID19 vaccine), screen at-risk populations for parasitic infection, and promote age and region-appropriate annual screening (e.g. skin cancer
surveillance using AI-assisted teledermatology). Several studies have
shown that ML can also be used to predict the effect of weather patterns associated with heatwaves2 and changes in air quality,3 or identifying environmental patterns associated with dengue fever
transmission. In addition, a combination of ML-blockchain and cloud
computing can be used to help improve the global cardiovascular
health epidemic (e.g. AI enable food selection to decrease obesity).4
Natural language processing (NLP) stands at the intersection of AI
and linguistics, allowing for the pre-processing of human language;
breaking down grammar and transforming it into numerical data, vectors, and matrices that computers can understand. An example of the
potential power of NLP within the healthcare field can be seen through
its combination with DL methodology. These tools can be utilized to
create an archive of conversations between clinicians and patients
within primary care clinics to improve the patient's experience. This
data can then be used as a training set for medical robots to facilitate
the distribution of medical questionnaires in primary care clinics or
personalized recommendations in telemental health for patients in

2322

Cardiopulse

Chayakrit Krittanawong, MD
Baylor College of Medicine
Houston, TX (USA)
charleskritmd@gmail.com

mechanism, adversarial examples, overfitting, and a lack of reporting
guidelines in ML studies remain as barriers. Finally, AI can lead to ethical
issues such as patient confidentiality violations, health inequality, or
misuse and bias from cultural prejudices.10
Artificial intelligence has tremendous potential for the facilitation of
precision global health, particularly in resource-poor settings. Artificial
intelligence-enabled physical technologies (e.g. cloud computing, mobile health, drones) can be used to prevent or treat infectious diseases
in low-income country settings and reduce non-communicable, 'lifestyle-related' diseases in developed countries. However, several limitations must be addressed before applying AI principles to global health
on a large scale.

Acknowledgements
The author would like to thank Dr Edward Choi, PhD (Google Inc,
Mountain View, CA) for his suggestions and comments on this article.
Conflict of interest: C.K. discloses the following relationships:
Journal of the American Heart Association (Editorial board); European
Heart Journal Digital Health (Editorial board); The Journal of Scientific
Innovation in Medicine (Associate Editor); The Lancet Digital Health
(Advisory board); The American College of Cardiology Solution Set
Oversight Committee (Committee); The ACCF/AHA Task Force on
Performance Measures (Committee).

References
1. Krittanawong C, Johnson KW, Rosenson RS, Wang Z, Aydar M, Baber U, Min JK,
Tang WH, Halperin JL, Narayan SM. Deep learning for cardiovascular medicine: a
practical primer. Eur Heart J; 2019;40:2058-2073.
2. Iglesias G, Kale DC, Liu Y. An examination of deep learning for extreme climate
pattern analysis. The 5th International Workshop on Climate Informatics 2015,
https://www2.cisl.ucar.edu/sites/default/files/29-%20Iglesias.pdf.
3. Delavar M, Gholami A, Shiran G, Rashidi Y, Nakhaeizadeh G, Fedra K, Hatefi
Afshar S. A novel method for improving air pollution prediction based on machine
learning approaches: a case study applied to the capital city of Tehran. ISPRS Int J
Geo-Inf 2019;8:99.
4. Krittanawong C, Rogers AJ. Integrating blockchain technology with artificial intelligence for cardiovascular medicine. 2019.
5. Poostchi M, Silamut K, Maude RJ, Jaeger S, Thoma G. Image analysis and machine
learning for detecting malaria. Transl Res 2018;194:36-55.
6. Pasa F, Golkov V, Pfeiffer F, Cremers D, Pfeiffer D. Efficient deep network architectures for fast chest X-ray tuberculosis screening and visualization. Sci Rep
2019;9:6268.
7. One small flight for a drone, one 'big leap' for global health. https://news.un.org/
en/story/2018/12/1028931. Accessed by 1/22/2021
8. SpEURanig S, Emberger-Klein A, Sowa J-P, Canbay A, Menrad K, Heider D, The virtual
doctor: an interactive artificial intelligence based on deep learning for non-invasive
prediction of diabetes. 2019, available online at: https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.12069.
9. Sheikhtaheri A, Sadoughi F, Hashemi Dehaghi Z. Developing and using expert systems and neural networks in medicine: a review on benefits and challenges. J Med
Syst 2014;38:110.
10. Angwin Jlk MS, Kirchner L, Machine bias: ProPublica, 2016. https://www.propublica.
org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing.

Scott Kaplin, MD
New York University
School of Medicine
New York, NY (USA)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/24/2321/6127595 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

the images of peripheral blood smears,5 or the diagnosis of tuberculosis based on CXR findings.6 Images obtained from remote villages can
be transmitted via cloud-based mobile phones and sent to an AI analytic pool for interpretation. The original sender will then receive a response containing medical recommendations and triage. Global Good
(Bellevue, Washington, DC, USA) applied DL to mobile phones for
cervical cancer screening in Africa. Moreover, computer vision with
enhanced computational power can be used for scanning food in restaurants or even on the street, and AI can then predict calorie content
and provide recommendations on whether individuals should consume the item or not. This could prove useful in helping prevent the
development of childhood metabolic syndrome or eating disorders in
developed countries and decrease Opisthorchis viverrini-related cholangiocarcinoma in developing countries.
Another potential area where cutting edge technology and medicine
intersect is through the utilization of medical robots (e.g. doc.ai) and
programmed drones for the delivery of prescriptions or vaccines in
resource-poor settings. Zipline (San Francisco, CA, USA), for example,
uses AI-enabled drones to deliver medications, blood products, and
vaccines in Ghana and Rwanda. Stanford Lab OceanOne, an AIenabled robot, was utilized to explore the ocean and reduce global
warming. DroneSense, from Austin, Texas, delivered vaccines to a
small island in the remote South Pacific.7 Medical robots and drones
can be combined with the aforementioned computer vision to allow
for several exciting potential areas of expansion. For example, employing computer vision for the remote diagnosis of parasitic infections or
tuberculosis based on computer-analysed imaging findings, followed by
operating drones for the delivery of the resultant anti-helminthic or
anti-tuberculosis medications.
Finally, AI-enabled clinical decision-making has been implemented
within the medical field for decades, and in recent times has been increasingly applied for the delivery of global health. Ada Health GmbH
(Berlin, German), for example, is an AI-powered self-checkup application, which has integrated Swahili and Romanian languages in order to
help people with scarce medical resources in East Africa and Romania.
Artificial intelligence-enabled clinical decision-making, such as the virtual doctor, will become increasingly prevalent in remote areas.8 One
area of implementation has been the telemonitoring of heart failure
patients, where remote monitoring of fluid balance allowed for the adjustment of diuretics without an in-person office visit, and in effect, decreased utilization of hospital resources. The potential applications of a
program like this are boundless.
There remain three main challenges for the integration of AI in precision global health. Firstly, data variability, data incompleteness, and
poor data quality control strain AI validation.9 Second, algorithm limitations such as generalization to unknown data distributions, Blackbox


