CardioPulse

2231

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa1039

At the Heart of Hospital Universitario Central
de Asturias (HUCA), Oviedo, Spain
the essence represented by patients and their cardiovascular disorders. In
the context of the structural cardiac intervention care process of the
HUCA, since 2004 we accepted the challenge of launching this model of
change at a national level, instead of waiting for the changes to come to us.
In the HUCA's Heart Area, the integration of structural and valve diseases offers the best-individualized solution for each patient and each
problem, through super-specialized care processes.
As an example of these processes, we can cite percutaneous aortic valve
treatment. Since we introduced the first transcatheter self-expanding aortic valve implantation in Spain in 2007, the Heart Area has been and
remains a leading national centre, not only in the number of procedures
carried out but also in terms of innovation and development.
The intervention targeted at the mitral valve has been another field of
development in recent years. The HUCA's Heart Area, with a consolidated
trajectory, has become one of the Spanish national reference centres in

The HUCA's Heart Area is the paradigm of this philosophy and is oriented towards patients and the integral management and diagnosis of cardiovascular diseases, replacing the classic organizational model based on
individual departments. Under a single leadership of the Area (Prof. Cesar
Moris), more than 50 specialists work in three units that function transversely in the interdisciplinary continuum of the cardiovascular care process:
Cardiology, Cardiac Surgery, and Critical Cardiac Care.
Aiming to secure excellence, it was necessary to increasingly advance
towards greater organization into specialized functional units: Coronary
disease, Structural and valve disease, Heart failure, and Arrhythmias and
electrophysiology. Each of these units is staffed by clinical and imaging cardiologists, interventionists, heart surgeons, and geriatricians.
This functional organization places the human and material resources at
the disposal of the main care processes, and with due consideration of the
clinical practice guides, offers each patient the treatment option or options
best adapted to their particular characteristics.
In recent years, the development of new techniques and procedures has
modified the frontiers of invasive management of structural heart disease,
requiring interventional cardiologists to become structural interventionists,
while cardiac surgeons have become hybrid surgeons. The convergence of
both specialties responds to the need and obligation to adequately address

transcatheter mitral valve repair.
Other processes encompassed within structural interventional practice
are the percutaneous management of congenital heart disease in the adult
(with a specific follow-up clinic), appendage closure, and interventions targeted to the tricuspid valve.
One of the care processes that reflect the treatment continuum is complex and high-risk percutaneous coronary intervention (CHIP). In this regard, we are a high-volume European reference centre in rotational
atherectomy and other atheroma plaque-modifying techniques, with the
application of specific programs such as the chronic total occlusions
program.
Advanced heart failure reflects the transverse nature of patient care.
We encompass scenarios ranging from emergencies with the availability of
the most advanced hemodynamic support and ventricular assist measures,
to more chronic situations such as the heart transplant program or longterm patient care.
The electrophysiology and arrhythmias program is one of the national
references in the field of high-complexity ablations, with one of the highest
number of device implantation procedures in the country. We lead a number of international research and innovation projects in the field of intrinsic
mechanisms in cardiac fibrillatory rhythms.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/23/2231/6067612 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

The Heart Area is a clinical management area integrated within the
Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias (HUCA), the main healthcare
centre in the region of Asturias (Principado de Asturias) (Spain), and one
of the most important in the country. Historically, the HUCA is the result
of the merging of three hospital centres: Hospital Nuestra Se~nora de
Covadonga, the Instituto Nacional de Silicosis, and Hospital General de
Asturias.
The new HUCA was inaugurated in 2014 and is located in Oviedo, the
capital of the Principado de Asturias, on the northern coast of Spain. The
HUCA was conceived from the beginning as a new organization for the
provision of medical care. Leaving behind the rigid hospital structure of the
past, as well as segmentation into nearly isolated individual departments,
the HUCA focused priority on adapting the structure to function, guided
by the example provided by nature: 'the function creates the organ' (J.B.
Lamarck 1809).

2232

CardioPulse

Conflict of interest: none declared.

HUCA's Heart Area organization

Isaac Pascual MD, PhD, FESC
Consultant in Interventional Cardiology, Hospital
Universitario de Asturias, Associate Professor of
Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of
Oviedo, Instituto de Investigaci'on Sanitaria del
Principado de Asturias (ISPA), Oviedo, Spain

Pablo Avanzas MD, PhD, FESC
Consultant in Interventional Cardiology, Hospital
Universitario de Asturias, Associate Professor of
Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University
of Oviedo, Instituto de Investigaci'on Sanitaria del
Principado de Asturias (ISPA), Oviedo, Spain

C'esar Mor'is MD PhD FESC.
Corresponding author
Heart Area Director, Hospital Universitario de
Asturias, Full Professor of Cardiology, Department
of Medicine, University of Oviedo, Instituto de
Investigaci'on Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias
(ISPA), Oviedo, Spain; Heart Area Director, Hospital
Universitario Central de Asturias, Avda de Roma
S/N, 33014, Oviedo, Spain
Tel: 958109417; email: cmoris@uniovi.es

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/23/2231/6067612 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

At the HUCA's Heart Area, patient care is complemented by teaching
activities through its ties with the University of Oviedo. The Director is a
Full University Professor. The teaching team is completed by an assistant
professor and five associated professors. In the last 4 years, the teaching activities have taken place in an area of the hospital itself, specifically designed
for this purpose.
The research activity in turn is carried out within the Instituto de
Investigaci
on Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA), in which the
Heart Area constitutes one of the main references, with a large number of
translational research lines of its own.
The driving principle of the HUCA's Heart Area is a holistic vision of the
heart and of cardiovascular disease. The functional organization in specialized processes offers precise solutions adapted to each individual circumstance. However, the individual excellence of each procedure takes on a
real meaning as a part of the transverse process. This functional organization binds and places each of its parts into perspective.
From structure adapted to function, and from its transverse approach
to integral management and diagnosis, the HUCA's Heart Area embodies
the essence of the 'Heart Team'.


