European Heart Journal (2021) 42, 2225-2234
doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab034

Computational modelling to reduce outcome
variability in tissue-engineered heart valves

Valery L. Visser1, Polina Zaytseva1, Sarah E. Motta1,2, Sandra Loerakker3,4,
Simon P. Hoerstrup1,2, and Maximilian Y. Emmert 1,2,5,6*
1
Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; 2Wyss Zurich, University of Zurich and ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; 3Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, Netherlands; 4Institute for Complex Molecular Systems, Eindhoven University of Technology,
Eindhoven, Netherlands; 5Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Charite UniversitEURatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; and 6Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular surgery,
German Heart Center Berlin, Berlin Germany

Clinical problem
Replacement of a severely dysfunctional heart valve remains the only
viable option for the majority of patients with valvular heart disease,
and the choice of the best suitable prosthesis is based on the patient's
anatomy, pathology, and comorbidities.1 Heart valve replacement via
open-heart surgery with temporary cardiac arrest has been the standard of care for decades but is not always applicable to elderly or highrisk patients. In this context, transcatheter valve replacement (TVR)
strategies have evolved in recent years and provide an alternative
treatment option for inoperable, high-risk, but now also intermediateand low-risk patients.1 However, despite this tremendous evolution in
the field, the heart valve prostheses currently utilized in TVR
approaches (i.e. bioprostheses) are prone to continuous degeneration
and still lack the ability to grow, self-repair, and regenerate, thus making them not suitable for younger patients.1 Hence, the combination of
TVR with tissue-engineered heart valves (TEHVs) with self-repair and
remodelling properties may provide a next-generation solution that
can be implanted via minimally invasive techniques and will subsequently integrate in the heart of the patients.1 These intrinsic regeneration properties will allow TEHVs to grow with the patient, adjust to
the dynamic environment, and eliminate the reoperation risks, thus
providing a lifelong, durable solution for paediatric and elderly patients.

Large heterogeneity of the
implanted tissue and subsequent
remodelling response
Despite the huge potential of such next-generation valve substitutes,
the technical and regulatory complexity, as well as the control of the
in vivo remodelling processes remain major translational challenges limiting TEHVs clinical translation. Additionally, it has recently been
shown that there is a large variability in the preclinical outcomes of

TEHV remodelling.1 Factors like the in vitro culture method, the use of
xenogeneic material, cell seeding, scaffold type, valve design, and implantation method lead to heterogeneity of the implanted tissue.1
Other factors such as inter- and intra-subject differences in the growth
and remodelling response between animals and ultimately patients,
also contribute to the observed variability in the (pre)clinical outcomes. One study demonstrated that substantial leaflet-to-leaflet variability is observed in regard to the degree of scaffold degradation and
leaflet thickness, as can be seen in Figure 1.2 Given that the differences
in (epi)genetic and environmental factors are rather small in preclinical studies, the variability in outcome is expected to be even larger
in the clinical setting. Therefore, an in-depth mechanistic understanding
of how such differences arise is mandatory in order to reliably develop
TEHVs that are predictable with regard to remodelling outcomes and
the associated functionality.

Solution: computational modelling
and the rise of personalized
medicine
To successfully translate TEHVs to the clinic, a systematic approach is
needed to identify TEHV design criteria. The integration of in silico
computational modelling (CM) tools with experimental studies is crucial to obtain a mechanistic understanding of the multi-level phenomena that occur after TEHVs implantation.3 Only when the in vivo
remodelling process of TEHVs is understood from a mechanistic point
of view, the currently observed variability can be reduced or even
eliminated.3 It is important to note that the optimal TEHV is not defined only by its design but also by the anatomical correspondence,
adaptation to patient-specific haemodynamic loading, and anticipation
of the presence of comorbidities in the patient which might affect
the regenerative capacity. To this end, patient-specific therapies are
becoming increasingly popular (i.e. personalized medicine), as new

Corresponding author. Tel: th41 44 634 5610, Fax: th41 44 634 56 08, Email: maximilian.emmert@irem.uzh.ch
C The Author(s) 2021. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. V

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/23/2225/6146665 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Could computational models become a pre-requisite for the broad
clinical translation of tissue-engineered heart valves?

2226

CardioPulse

inter-patient differences that might affect functional remodelling of
TEHVs are discovered on a regular basis.4 Nevertheless, CM has the
potential to explain their influence, adjust for these differences and
may therefore play a central role in the development of patientspecific TEHVs.

maladaptive remodelling of TEHVs for example leading to excessive
leaflet thickening and calcification (Figure 2). Understanding of how mechanical stimuli affect the remodelling response of cells and tissues is
therefore crucial to understand how functional (adaptive) remodelling
of TEHVs may be established.

Mechanical factors heavily
influence tissue-engineered heart
valve functionality and remodelling

Inter- and intra-patient differences
influence remodelling of
tissue-engineered heart valves

Mechanical factors have a large influence on the performance, integration, and adaptation of TEHVs in the host.5 Cells repopulating the
heart valves after implantation are subjected to haemodynamic parameters such as pressure, shear forces, and stretch and are known to respond and adapt to these forces to maintain homeostasis in healthy
valve tissues.5 These cellular responses are also crucial for functional
remodelling of TEHVs towards native-like valve tissue as they, for example, control extracellular matrix remodelling, tissue compaction and
growth factor excretion and inhibition.3,6 On the other hand, cells can
also transform into pathologically activated phenotypes (e.g. M1 macrophages and myofibroblasts), under non-physiological (mechanical)
conditions,5 like hypertension or aberrant tissue stretch.5 These pathological stimuli may induce a chronical inflammatory state, which causes

Mechanical parameters can vary between patients or even between
different heart valve leaflets. Inter-patient variability is often observed
in blood pressure, annulus size, and stiffness.7 Intra-patient variabilities
are also found in heart valves such as asymmetry in the leaflet size and
composition.8 Inter- and intra-patient variations affect the mechanical
behaviour of heart valve leaflets and may induce a heterogeneous spatial distribution of stresses and strains.8 These mechanical stimuli evoke
a response from the valvular interstitial cells, and subsequently either
physiological homeostasis or a maladaptive inflammatory state is
reached.1 Therefore, mechanistic understanding of how inter- and
intra-patient differences affect remodelling could indicate how TEHVs
adopt a functional remodelling response instead of maladaptive
remodelling (Figure 2).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/23/2225/6146665 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 1 Leaflet-to-leaflet variability for tissue-engineered heart valve scaffold degradation and leaflet thickness. Figure was adapted and reprinted
from Fioretta et al.2 under the Creative Commons license 4.0 and with permission from the authors.

CardioPulse

2227

In addition to mechanical parameters, there are also systemic effects
which might affect TEHV remodelling in patients, such as comorbidities
which may significantly affect the remodelling capacity of the cells in
TEHVs.8

Computational modelling can be
used to rationally optimize tissueengineered heart valve design
CM is utilized to optimize the design of TEHVs in all steps of the clinical
translation from bench to bedside, as visualized in Figure 4. First, models
are used to study how (mechanical) stimuli affect the remodelling response of (single) cells in vitro.9 This can be expanded to understand
how a functional remodelling response can be provoked in a tissue
in vitro in either a static condition or a bioreactor, where the tissue is often subjected to multiple stimuli in concert.9 Finally, models are used in
in vivo studies, to predict the remodelling potential of a TEHV towards
native-like tissue.3 As it often occurs that several pathways or stimuli
will have competing or synergistic influences on cell or tissue behaviour,
models can aid in understanding how these processes cooperate to define the final remodelling response of a cell or tissue.9
For all steps from bench to bedside, a model could be made
prior to the experiment, which aids to define hypotheses or
defines how the TEHV should be designed. Besides this, retrospective models can be made, to explain unexpected findings.

Both the simulations prior and after an experiment can be used
to optimize the design of the TEHV, as for example done previously by Emmert et al. where the geometry of TEHV was substantially improved as visualized in Figure 3.3,6 Optimization
algorithms should therefore be developed to enable the improvement of the valve design within a predefined set of suitable parameter ranges.

Computational modelling can
analyse the effect of inter- and
intra-patient differences on the
remodelling of tissue-engineered
heart valves
Computational models, which describe the remodelling response of a
TEHV, are often able to incorporate patient-specific input parameters.
If a maladaptive remodelling response is predicted to arise, either the
design of the TEHV could be optimized or patients with these specific
conditions are not recommended to use this TEHV. It is possible that
there is no design that will suit the majority of the patients, or that a patient has an exceptional cardiovascular signature. In that case, patientspecific treatments could be developed, where the TEHV is tailored to
each specific case. Initiatives like the digital patient roadmap and the
Virtual Physiological Human provide frameworks to integrate multiple

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/23/2225/6146665 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 2 Adaptive vs. maladaptive remodelling in heart valve implants. Figure was adapted and reprinted from Fioretta et al.1 with permission from authors.

2228

CardioPulse

computational models to study the human body and are of great importance for the development of these patient-specific treatments.4

Using computational modelling
reduces trial and error in
pre-clinical and clinical studies
CM would enable investigators to scale down the trial and error
phase in preclinical studies, obtaining scientific results at reduced
labour cost and animal sacrifice. In silico designed TEHVs have
shown sustainable long-term performance in a translational sheep
model as predicted by computational solutions,3 indicating the
relevance of an integrated bioengineering approach. CM can be
implemented at any stage of clinical translation-from TE implant
design and parameter evaluation to predicting therapy outcomes
in (pre)clinical trials and beyond.
Recently, a clinical trial in Japan showed promising results following
implantation of tissue-engineered vascular grafts as cardiac conduits in
children.10 However, a follow-up trial in the USA was halted, after evidence of stenosis was observed within 8 months of implantation. By
simulating the adaptation of the graft in silico, CM could explain the development of stenosis observed in the trials, as well as predict its spontaneous resolution via inflammation-driven graft remodelling-which

was later confirmed experimentally. This evidence substantiates the
importance of CM in cardiovascular tissue engineering and its ability to
reduce trial and error within the preclinical development and validation of such technologies.

How computational modelling
should be incorporated in ISO
guidelines
Current regulatory requirements for cardiovascular implants outlined
by ISO 5840 guidelines are suboptimal for tissue-engineered devices,
as they do not consider their regenerative and growth potential.1 The
regulations are set to be revised, once the clinical translation of TEHV
is achieved. Including in silico clinical trials as part of the updated guidelines would support the evaluation of the devices and facilitate quality
assurance. Importantly, models should be properly validated in order
to contribute successfully to clinical translation.4
Implementing CM as a pre-requisite in the ISO testing standards to
study maladaptive remodelling responses could systematically raise
clinical performance of next-generation TEHV. On top of that,
by implementing CM the safety of TEHV will be increased significantly,
as suboptimal TEHV designs are avoided by predicting success or
failure.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/23/2225/6146665 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 3 Example of rational design optimization of tissue-engineered heart valve geometry, to reduce radial compression of scaffold material.
Figure was reprinted from Motta et al.6 under the Creative Commons license 4.0 and with permission from the authors.

2229

CardioPulse

Models as pre-requisite for clinical
translation would improve
treatment efficacy
In summary, next-generation TEHVs are eagerly awaited in the field,
and provide hope for future heart valve replacement therapies, in particular for the young and children. To date, efficient clinical translation
has been slower than anticipated due to several technical challenges.1
Advancements in CM have consolidated it as an increasingly valuable
tool with great potential to revolutionize TEHV design and evaluation.
In silico strategies could help to carry out safe clinical translation of TE
cardiovascular implants, as well as improve treatment efficacy and
long-term performance through the simulation of treatment
outcomes.

Funding
M.Y.E. and S.L. have received funding from the European Research Council
(ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme, grant agreement no. 852814 (TAVI4Life) and grant agreement
no. 802967 (MechanoSignaling). V.V, P.Z, and S.E.M. are supported by the
ERC grant TAVI4Life.
Conflict of interest: S.P.H. is a shareholder at Xeltis BV and LifeMatrix
Technologies AG. M.Y.E. is a shareholder at LifeMatrix Technologies AG.

3. Emmert MY, Schmitt BA, Loerakker S, Sanders B, Spriestersbach H, Fioretta ES,
Bruder L, Brakmann K, Motta SE, Lintas V, Dijkman PE, Frese L, Berger F, Baaijens
FPT, Hoerstrup SP. Computational modeling guides tissue-engineered heart valve
design for long-term in vivo performance in a translational sheep model. Sci Transl
Med 2018;10:eaan4587.
4. Diaz VM, Viceconti M, Stroetmann K, Kalra D. DIGITAL PATIENT roadmap; roadmap for the digital patient. Discipulus Eur Comm 2013.
5. Garoffolo G, Pesce M. Mechanotransduction in the cardiovascular system: from
developmental origins to homeostasis and pathology. Cells NLM (Medline)
2019;8:1607.
6. Motta SE, Fioretta ES, Lintas V, Dijkman PE, Hilbe M, Frese L, Cesarovic N,
Loerakker S, Baaijens FPT, Falk V, Hoerstrup SP, Emmert MY. Geometry influences
inflammatory host cell response and remodeling in tissue-engineered heart valves
in-vivo. Sci Rep 2020;10:19882.
7. van Geemen D, Soares ALF, Oomen PJA, Driessen-Mol A, Janssen-van den Broek
MWJT, van den Bogaerdt AJ, Bogers AJJC, Goumans M-J, Baaijens FPT, Bouten
CVC. Age-dependent changes in geometry, tissue composition and mechanical
properties of fetal to adult cryopreserved human heart valves. PLoS One
2016;11:e0149020.
8. Grande KJ, Cochran RP, Reinhall PG, Kunzelma KS. Stress variations in the human aortic
root and valve: the role of anatomic asymmetry. Ann Biomed Eng 1998;26:534-545.
9. Obbink-Huizer C, Oomens CWJ, Loerakker S, Foolen J, Bouten CVC, Baaijens
FPT. Computational model predicts cell orientation in response to a range of mechanical stimuli. Biomech Model Mechanobiol 2014;13:227-236.
10. Drews JD, Pepper VK, Best CA, Szafron JM, Cheatham JP, Yates AR, Hor KN,
Zbinden JC, Chang YC, Mirhaidari GJM, Ramachandra AB, Miyamoto S, Blum KM,
Onwuka EA, Zakko J, Kelly J, Cheatham SL, King N, Reinhardt JW, Sugiura T,
Miyachi H, Matsuzaki Y, Breuer J, Heuer ED, Aaron West T, Shoji T, Berman D,
Boe BA, Asnes J, Galantowicz M, Matsumura G, Hibino N, Marsden AL, Pober JS,
Humphrey JD, Shinoka T, Breuer CK. Spontaneous reversal of stenosis in tissueengineered vascular grafts. Sci Transl Med 2020;12: 1-14.

References
1. Fioretta ES, Motta SE, Lintas V, Loerakker S, Parker KK, Baaijens FPT, Falk V,
Hoerstrup SP, Emmert MY. Next-generation tissue-engineered heart valves with
repair, remodelling and regeneration capacity. Nat Rev Cardiol 2021;118:92-116.
2. Fioretta ES, Lintas V, Mallone A, Motta SE, von BL, Dijkman PE, Cesarovic N,
Caliskan E, Rodriguez Cetina Biefer H, Lipiski M, Sauer M, Putti M, Janssen HM,
Sontjens SH, Smits AIPM, Bouten CVC, Emmert MY, Hoerstrup SP. Differential
leaflet remodeling of bone marrow cell pre-seeded versus nonseeded bioresorbable transcatheter pulmonary valve replacements. JACC Basic Transl Sci
2020;5:15-31.

Corresponding author
Maximilian Y. Emmert
Institute for Regenerative Medicine,
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
maximilian.emmert@irem.uzh.ch

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/23/2225/6146665 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 4 Examples of added value of computational modelling in each step of clinical translation of tissue-engineered heart valve (TEHV) from
bench to bedside. In silico models can attribute to mechanistic understanding of in vitro and in vivo studies. Subfigure of TEHV performance was
reprinted from Motta et al.6 under the Creative Commons license 4.0 and with permission from the authors.


