4003

CardioPulse

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab262

Global Spotlights

COVID-19 and the heart: insights from the
National Societies of Cardiology Journals

Hopital Rene Muret, Hopitaux Universitaires de Paris Seine Saint-Denis, Avenue du docteur Schaeffner, Sevran 93270, France

The outbreak of COVID-19 has generated an enormous publication
activity from both international-oriented journals and National
Societies of Cardiology Journals (NSCJ). The later provided many national- or regional-specific features of the pandemic spread.
In a bibliometric analysis of publications of COVID-19 and their scientific impact during the first 3 months of the pandemic, DieguezCampa et al. from Mexico identified 2530 publications on COVID-19
recorded from PubMed/MEDLINE. They were written by authors
from 67 countries (China 39%, USA 16.7%), and they subsequently
generated 59 104 citations. While taking into account all 67 countries
of origin, the authors showed a correlation between the number of
publications per country, and the numbers of confirmed cases of
COVID-19 and deaths related to the disease.1 Bohm et al. attributed
the increase in submission rate to Clinical Research in Cardiology during
the shutdown to travel restrictions, cancellation of medical congresses,
reduction of clinical and scientific meetings, and advisory boards. Of
note, a shorter review time and a shorter time to acceptance or rejection were observed concomitantly.2
The containment policy and related shutdown directly impacted
cardiovascular practice. In a multicenter study from France, Huet et al.
showed that before containment, the nine participating intensive cardiac care units (ICCUs) admitted 4.8 6 1.6 patients per day for acute
myocardial infarction (AMI) or heart failure (HF) vs. 2.6 6 1.5 only during containment.3
In a Spanish nationwide registry (75 ICCUs) of patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI), Rodriguez-Leor et al.
showed that suspected and confirmed patients with STEMI decreased
by 27% during the COVID-19. There was no difference in time from
first medical contact to reperfusion nor in reperfusion strategies, with
94% primary percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI). However,
in-hospital mortality was higher during COVID-19 (7.5% vs. 5.1%).
Among patients treated during the COVID, the incidence of confirmed
SARS-CoV2 infection was only 6.3%.4 These changes significantly impacted interventional cardiology procedures with a reduction in diagnosis procedures (56%), PCI (48%), structural interventions
(81%), and primary PCI for STEMI.5
In a meta-analysis of cardiovascular complications of COVID-19
published by Momtazmanesh et al. in the Egyptian Heart Journal, acute
cardiac injury occurred in 25% of the 10 898 patients included from 35

*Corresponding author. Tel: th33 141525832, Email: jean-jacques.monsuez@aphp.fr

studies. Admission to intensive care units of patients with cardiac involvement was 13.5-fold and mortality was 20-fold higher as compared
with patients without cardiac manifestations.6
Arrhythmias accounted for 11.7% of 692 patients admitted to 35
hospitals with COVID-19 according to the Portuguese Association of
Arrhythmias. Older patients were the most exposed (median age
73.5 years) as well as patients with hypertension (64%). Observed
arrhythmias included paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
(26.6%), atrial fibrillation (AF, 62.5%), sinus bradycardia (7.8%), and
ventricular tachycardia (3.1%). An arrhythmia or a prolongation of QT
interval was observed in 10.8% of 53 patients to whom any experimental drug regimen against SARS-CoV2 was administered.7
Diagnosis of myocardial involvement with SARS-CoV2 remains
often challenging until MRI is performed. Along with d-dimer and
troponin assessment, the level and significance of anti-cardiac antibodies has been examined in a Russian study by Blagova et al.
Among 86 patients admitted to hospital for moderate-to-severe
COVID-19, cardiac damage (45.3% of patients) included new-onset
AF (9.3%), HF (9.3%), low QRS voltage (11.4%), repolarization abnormalities (41.5%), and pericardial effusion (30%). Anti-cardiac
antibodies were found with three-fold higher titres in 25 patients
(73.5%), and their level correlated with pericardial effusion and
mortality.8
Pulmonary artery circulation in patients with COVID-19 has been
extensively reviewed by Jansa and Ascherman, from Praha, who
showed that prevalence of COVID-19 is not increased in patients with
pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). A potential explanation of this
could pertain to vasodilatation, anti-remodelling, and anti-aggregation
effects of specific therapies administered to patients with PAH.9
Although most reports have confirmed that COVID-19 causes mild
symptoms only among children, more severe illnesses may sometimes
occur, especially in children with congenital heart disease or associated
comorbidities. A scientific statement on the optimal management of
children with COVID-19 has been published by Kocak et al. from
Turkey. Echocardiography is recommended in children with HF, unexplained tachycardia incompatible with fever, cardiomegaly, ST-T segment changes, and arrhythmia. Acute myocardial injury should be
detected using biomarkers if symptoms are present. In this later case,
myocarditis, pericardial effusion, and coronary artery dilatation

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/39/4003/6288114 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Jean-Jacques Monsuez *; on behalf of the Editors' Network of the National
Societies of Cardiology Journals (NSCJ)+

4004

Appendix
Jean-Jacques Monsuez (Editor-in-Chief of Archives des Maladies du
Coeur et des Vaisseaux Pratique), France; Plamen Gatzov (Editor-inChief of Bulgarian Cardiology Journal), Bulgaria; Gergely Agoston
(Associate Editor of Cardiologia Hungarica), Hungary; Michael
Aschermann (Editor-in-Chief of Cor et Vasa), Czech Republic; Hala
Mahfouz Badran (Editor-in-Chief of Egyptian Heart Journal), Egypt;
Michael Bohm (Editor-in-Chief of Clinical Research in Cardiology,
Germany); Alfonso Buendia-Hernandez (Editor-in-Chief of
Archivos de Cardiologia de Mexico), Mexico; Nuno Cardim (Editorin-Chief of Revista Portuguesa de Cardiologia), Portugal; Jose-Maria
De La Torre (Editor-in-Chief of REC Interventional Cardiology),
Spain; Cetin Erol (Editor-in-Chief of Anatolian Journal of Cardiology),
Turkey; Gerd Heusch (Editor-in-Chief of Basic Research in
Cardiology, Germany); Kurt Huber (Editor-in-Chief of Austrian
Journal of Cardiology), Austria; Yves Juilliere (Editor-in-Chief of
Archives of Cardiovascular Diseases), France; Evgeny Shlyakhto
(Editor-in-Chief of Russian Journal of Cardiology), Russia; Anetta
Undas (Editor-in-Chief of Kardiologia Polska), Poland; Dilek Ural
(Editor-in-Chief of Archives of The Turkish Society of Cardiology),
Turkey; Fernando Alfonso (past Chairman of the Editors' Network
of the European Society of Cardiology), Spain; Ignacio FerreiraGonzalez (Editor-in-Chief of Revista Espa~nola de Cardiologia and
Chairman of the Editors' Network of the European Society of
Cardiology), Spain.

References
1. Dieguez-Campa CE, Perez-Neri I, Reyes-Teran G, Flores-Apodaca IA, CastilloLedon-Pretelini J, Mercado-Bautista O, Alvarez-Santana R, Zenteno MA, Bowles B,
Lee A. The 2020 research pandemic: a bibliometric analysis of publications on
COVID-19 and their scientific impact during the first months. Arch Cardiol Mex
2020. doi:10.24875/ACM.20000375.
2. Bohm M, Ewen S, Schweitzer A, Katus HUGO. Scientific publication activity during
COVID-19 shutdown. Clin Res Cardiol 2020;109:1443-1445.
3. Huet F, Prieur C, Schurtz G, Gerbaud E, Manzo-Silberman S, Vanzetto G, Elbaz M,
Tea V, Mercier G, Lattuca B, Duflos C, Roubille F. One train may hide another:
acute cardiovascular diseases could be neglected because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Arch Cardiovas Dis 2020;113:303-307.
4. Rodriguez-Leor O, Cid-Alvarez B, Perez de Prado A, Rossello X, Ojeda S,
Serrador A, Lopez-Palop R, Martin-Moreiras J, Rumoroso JR, Cequier A, Ibanez B,
Cruz-Gonzalez I, Romaguera R, Moreno R. Impact of COVID-19 on ST-segment
elevation myocardial infarction care. The Spanish experience. Rev Esp Cardiol
2020;73:994-1002.
5. Rodriguez-Leor O, Cid-Alvarez B, Ojeda S, Martin-Moreiras J, Rumoroso JR,
Lopez-Palop R, Serrador A, Cequier A, Romaguera R, Cruz I, Perez de Prado A,
Moreno R. Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on interventional cardiology in
Spain. REC Interv Cardiol 2020;2:82-89.
6. Momtazmanesh S, Shobeiri P, Hanaei S, Mahmoud-Elsayed H, Dalvi B, Malakan Rad
E. Cardiovascular disease in COVID: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 10
898 patients and proposal of a triage risk stratification. Egypt Heart J 2020;72.
doi:10.1186/s43044-020-00075-z.
7. Mesquita D, Carmo P, Cabanelas N. Cardiac arrhythmias in patients presenting
with COVID 19 treated in Portuguese hospitals. A National Registry from APAPE.
Rev Port Cardiol 2021, in press.
8. Blagova OV, Varionchik NV, Zaydenov VA, Savina PO, Sarkisova ND. Anticardiac
antibodies in patients with severe and moderate COVID-19. Russ J Cardiol
2020;25:4054.
9. Jansa P, Ascherman M. COVID-19 in disorders of pulmonary circulation. Cor Vasa
2020;62:19-21.
10. Kocak G, Ergul Y, Nisli K, Hatemi AC, Tutar E, Tokel NK, Celebi A. Evaluation and
follow-up of pediatric COVID-19 in terms of cardiac involvement: a scientific
statement from the Association of Turkish pediatric cardiology and Pediatric cardiac surgery. Anatol J Cardiol 2020; 24:13-18.
11. Garvanski I, Petrov I, Simova I. Recommendations for the follow-up of patients
with cardiovascular disease when administering potentially effective medications

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/39/4003/6288114 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

resulting from a multisystem inflammatory syndrome similar to
Kawasaki disease should get tested.10
A safe use of potentially effective drugs is also required in adults.
Several publications have emerged describing the likely effects of the
use of well-known drugs, including chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine,
and their combination with azithromycin. QT prolongation induced by
these drugs may result in torsades de pointes and, in turn, sudden cardiac
death. An approach to monitor and to screen patients at risk to avoid
such life-threatening events has been proposed by Garvanski and
Petrov,11 from Bulgaria.
Other more unlikely treatments took place against SARSCoV2. Among them, plants used in traditional Chinese medicine
are quite popular. Their use was supported in part by previous
trials on other viral diseases. In a study by Akalin et al. from
Turkey, data available from PubMed/MEDLINE on antiviral, antiinflammatory, and immunomodulatory effects of the 10 most
used plants against COVID-19 were extensively reviewed.
Despite effectiveness seen in laboratory and animal studies, clinical studies remains at least insufficient, or for the time being not
available.12
In the sickest patients, a hyperimmune response characterized
by a cytokine storm leads to critical illness and end-organ dysfunction with a high mortality rate. Given their anti-inflammatory and
immune-modulating effects, various cell types have emerged as
therapeutic candidates, among which the cardiosphere-derived
cells, stromal/progenitor cells derived from heart tissue (antigenic
profile CD105th, CD45, CD90low). These cells, already tested
in patients with miscellaneous heart diseases, including AMI, HF,
and PAH, have been successfully administered to six critically ill
patients with COVID-19 (decreased PaO2/FiO2 ratio, diffuse bilateral pulmonary infiltrates on CT scan). By contrast with patients
with similar severity (18% mortality) who all received the IL-6 inhibitor tocilizumab, those who received cardiosphere-derived cells
improved, as evidenced by extubation, survival, and early discharge
from hospital in four of six.13
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation with the use of personal protective equipment for aerosol-generating procedures (PPE AGP) in a
patient with a sudden cardiac death during the COVID-19 pandemic is uneasy. This has been analysed in a Polish study by
Malysz et al. This single-blinded, multicenter, randomized, crossover simulation study involved 67 paramedics wearing PPE AGP.
They performed 2-min continuous chest compressions, either
manual or with a LUCAS mechanical chest compression device, in
adults with suspected COVID-19. Both depth and rate of chest
compressions were more frequently correct with the mechanical
device. Accordingly, the authors suggest changing the healthcare
giver performing manual chest compressions every minute when
he or she is wearing a PPE AGP.14
Kaufmann and Huber from Austria published in German the most
often asked questions from patients with respect to COVID-19 and
cardiovascular diseases to provide helpful answers that were given by
ESC experts. Such an approach was perceived very useful among
readers.15
Although most NSCJ published updated reviews on cardiovascular manifestations of COVID-19 as international-oriented journals
did, they also provided original contributions focusing on unusual
fields, which were encountered during the pandemic.

CardioPulse

4005

CardioPulse

for the treatment of COVID-19 with a purpose to reduce the risk of QT prolongation and sudden cardiac death. Bulg Cardiol J 2020; 26:21-26.
EUR
EUR
12. Akalin E, Ekici M, Alan Z, Ozbir
Elevli E, Yaman Bucak A, Aobuliaikemu N, Uresin
AY.
Traditional Chinese medicine practices used in COVID-19 treatment in clinic and their
effects on the cardiovascular system. Turk Kardiyol Dern Ars 2020; 48:410-424.
13. Singh S, Chakravarty T, Chen P, Akhmerov A, Falk J, Friedman O, Zaman T,
Ebinger JE, Gheorghiu M, Marban L, Marban E, Makkar RR. Allogeneic

cardiosphere-derived cells (CAP-1002) in critically ill COVID-19 patients: compassionate-use care series. Basic Res Cardiol 2020; 115:36.
14. Malysz M, Smereka J, Jaguszewski M. An optimal chest compression technique using
personal protective equipment during resuscitation in the COVID-19 pandemic: a
randomized crossover simulation study. Kardiol Pol 2020;78:1254-1261.
15. Kaufmann CC, Huber K. COVID-19: what heart patients need to know? J Kardiol
2020;27:146-150.

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab188

Gertrude B. 'Trudy' Elion won the Nobel Prize in 1988. But what was she really like?
Her nephew, cardiologist Dr Jon Elion, reveals what an inspirational figure she was
to him and numerous others
Mark Nicholls*
MNmedia, Norfolk, UK

The headline in the Kentucky newspaper proclaimed: 'Nobel Laureate
is Just "Aunt Trudy" to Local Cardiologist'. The story was celebrating
the award of the 1988 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine to
Gertrude B. Elion, which she received jointly with George H. Hitchings
and Sir James W. Black 'for their discoveries of important principles for
drug treatment'.
While she may have been just 'Aunt Trudy' for headline purposes,
she was so much more: an inspirational figure who loved family life, fostered a joyous pursuit of science, and had a common touch with students, colleagues, and even Royalty.
The 'local cardiologist' was Dr Jon Elion, her nephew, who recalls
her as 'unassuming, pleasant, outgoing, and with an easy laugh'.
'She was very egalitarian in her views of gender, race, or lifestyle
preferences. She treated everybody equally, whether it was the King of
Sweden or the security guard at the research lab', he added.
But above all, she was an important inspiration to him.
Born in New York City on 23 January 1918, the daughter of a dentist, Trudy Elion enjoyed time with the wider family, often visiting her
brother (Jon's father), always bringing gifts and spending Christmases
with them.
'Aunt Trudy was a big part of our extended family and someone
with whom I was very close from my early childhood', said Jon.

Worldwide friendships
An avid photographer and traveller with interests in opera and ballet,
she went to many conferences-the Gordon Research Conference
was a favourite-and had worldwide friendships that crossed the
boundaries of countries and industries.
'She would swap stories and share preliminary results with others at
national and international meetings', he continued. 'But in looking back,
she never talked much about the science. Instead, she regaled us with
*Corresponding author. Email: mark.nicholls@mnmedia.co.uk

stories about the people that she met, "old friends" who would figure
prominently in later years, helping each other out, sending promising
compounds to each other to explore and test'.
He suspects this may have underpinned one of her favourite sayings:
'It's amazing how much you can get done if you don't care who gets
the credit'.
Understandably excited when she called with the news of her
Nobel Prize, great plans were made for the family to head to
Stockholm for the ceremony. Trudy insisted that her family join her
for the week-long Nobel festivities in Sweden, though her brother was
unable to attend because of severe back pain.

Blue chiffon
Having delivered her Nobel lecture, The Purine Path to
Chemotherapy, she attended the ceremonial ball, resplendent in a
blue chiffon dress.
Jon said: 'I remember my daughter being wide-eyed with amazement
when the Queen of Sweden, covered in jewels and a sparkling dress,
came over to her, took her by the hand, and brought her over to
where we were to pose for a picture with the King and Queen'.
In securing the 1988 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, Hitchings
and Elion had diverged from the historical trial-and-error approach of
drug development towards what became termed as rational drug design. New molecules with specific molecular structures were used to
create compounds that would interfere with the natural production of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) in cells and interrupt cell growth.

Crowning glory
Over the years the research philosophy formed the basis for new
drugs against diseases, including: thioguanine and 6-mercaptopurine

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/39/4003/6288114 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

A much-loved Nobel Laureate, known simply
as Aunt Trudy


