2625

CardioPulse

2. Wellbery C. The value of medical uncertainty? Lancet (Lond, Engl). 2010;
375:1686-1687.
3. Cadeddu C, Daugbjerg S, Ricciardi W, Rosano A. Beliefs towards vaccination and
trust in the scientific community in Italy. Vaccine 2020;38:6609-6617.
4. Vrachatis DA, Deftereos S, Stefanini GG. STEMI in COVID-19 patients:
thrombolysis-first approach could yield more risk than benefit. Eur Heart J
2020;41:4141-4142.

5. Chieffo A, Stefanini GG, Price S, Barbato E, Tarantini G, Karam N, Moreno R,
Buchanan GL, Gilard M, Halvorsen S, Huber K, James S, Neumann F-J, Mollmann H,
Roffi M, Tavazzi G, Mauri Ferre J, Windecker S, Dudek D, Baumbach A. EAPCI position statement on invasive management of acute coronary syndromes during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Eur Heart J 2020;41:1839-1851.
6. Uncertainty in medicine. Lancet (Lond, Engl) 2010;375:1666.

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab050

Daniel Engler 1,2, Hein Heidbuchel3, and Renate B. Schnabel
AFFECT-EU Investigators

1,2

*; for the

1
Department of Cardiology, University Heart and Vascular Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany; 2German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK) Partner Site
Hamburg/Kiel/Lubeck; and ; and 3Department of Cardiology, Antwerp University and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium

Owing to the demographic changes, we are facing an epidemic of atrial
fibrillation (AF) in the aging population with a prevalence of approximately 2.5-3%1 (twice as high in men and 5% prevalence in individuals
65 years) and a projected doubling of this number by 2050.2 Atrial fibrillation is often asymptomatic with its first manifestation being debilitating stroke in more than 10 of patients.3 Atrial fibrillation produces
significant healthcare costs for the European society and precludes

healthy aging. The European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines
recommend screening for AF to prevent complications and optimize
treatment, including the use of highly effective oral anticoagulation
(OAC) in patients at risk of stroke.4 However, questions on whom to
screen, how to screen, and the optimal setting for screening with highest efficiency remain unanswered. In this context, the EU-funded
AFFECT-EU project (www.affect-eu.eu, Figure 1) aims at developing a

Figure 1 Consortium members and geographic origin. All consortium partners are named in the supplement.
*Corresponding author. Email: r.schnabel@uke.de

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/27/2625/6145319 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Digital, risk-based screening for atrial
fibrillation in the European community-the
AFFECT-EU project funded by the
European Union

2626

CardioPulse

risk-based AF screening strategy using digital applications for rhythm
monitoring to reduce the burden of stroke and other AF-related
comorbidities.
Over the last decade, an increasing number of studies have
addressed diverse AF screening strategies in heterogeneous settings
using different digital devices from traditional ECG recordings to intermittent or semi-continuous pulse-based or electrocardiographic monitoring to continuous monitoring by external or implantable loop
recorders.
It is common sense that prolonged monitoring for AF will increase
the yield of screen-detected AF. However, little is known on the
screening yield by different screening strategies in primary care and in
the community. Currently, an arrhythmia must have a duration of at
least 30 s to be defined as AF. Shorter episodes of irregular atrial
rhythms are summarized under the general term atrial tachycardia or
micro AF. Longer-lasting (minutes to hours) episodes of asymptomatic
atrial arrhythmias are increasingly detected with the use of long-term,
continuous monitoring such as implanted devices. Although micro AF
and other episodes may be precursors of clinical AF, screening detection of such arrhythmias may be associated with a lower risk of stroke
than clinical AF and the use of OAC to treat individuals with such episodes is still a matter of controversy.5
In AFFECT-EU, study information from eight European screening
studies (Figure 2) will permit to estimate the efficiency of different
screening methods. Based on data from continuous monitoring studies
(e.g. Danish Loop6), the total AF burden from AF detected by different
types of screening, screening intensity, and screening intervals will be
simulated.

The number needed to provide robust outcome data in a screening
study is larger than could be enrolled in a single RCT.7 Therefore, a
systematic review and participant-level meta-analysis of outcome trials
including worldwide data from the AF Screen International
Collaboration8 consortium will summarize all available evidence and
assess the risks and benefits of AF screening. Simulations will be performed to derive risk estimates for adverse outcomes across the spectrum of screening types and intensity of AF screening.
Established, contemporary European [MORGAM, MOnica Risk,
Genetics, Archiving, and Monograph The MORGAM Project (thl.fi)]
population cohorts9,10 permit refinement of AF screening to increase
accuracy and reduce the number needed to screen through optimized
clinical prediction models. They will integrate health modifiers from
epidemiological and biomarker data sources to identify high-risk populations to tailor early AF detection.
Health economics flank the project. Decision analytic models including an updated stroke risk equation as well as updated parameters on
the prognosis of screen-detected AF, effectiveness, and adherence of
OAC treatment and long-term cost and effects of AF-related complications will be developed. The budget impact on the health care system of implementing different AF screening programs in a variety of
European countries will be assessed. Economic evaluations of different
screening strategies including a variety of devices in combination with
other diagnostic methods evaluating the marginal long-term cost-effectiveness from both health care providers and societal perspectives will
be performed.
The European Society of Cardiology represented by the European
Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) leads the implementation. First,

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/27/2625/6145319 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 2 Concept and goals of AFFECT-EU project.

2627

CardioPulse

o Dimension of the healthcare problem, relevance of screen-detected
atrial fibrillation

o Accuracy of digital screening methods
o Comparison of different screening methods (opportunistic, systematic, single-timepoint, prolonged)

o Cost-benefit ratio, effectiveness, and efficiency
o Feasibility, screenee, and healthcare professional acceptance
o Adaption to the regional, local environment also overcoming
inequities

o Health economics of digitized screening
o Outline of structured post-screening work-up processes
o Raising the awareness of the detrimental effects of undetected AF
will be raised in healthcare professionals, regulators, and the target
population.
Overall, the project is intended to reduce the burden of AF-related diseases and improve AF-associated health equity across Europe.

Funding
This project has received funding from the European Research Council
(ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme under the grant agreement No 847770 (AFFECT-EU).
Conflict of interest: none declared.

Renate B. Schnabel, MD, MSc
University Heart and Vascular Center
Hamburg, Germany
r.schnabel@uke.de

References
1. Magnussen C, Ojeda FM, Wild PS, Sorensen N, Rostock T, Hoffmann BA,
Prochaska J, Lackner KJ, Beutel ME, Blettner M, Pfeiffer N, Rzayeva N, Sinning CR,
Blankenberg S, Munzel T, Zeller T, Schnabel RB. Atrial fibrillation manifestations
risk factors and sex differences in a population-based cohort (From the Gutenberg
Health Study). Am J Cardiol 2018;122:76-82.
2. Di Carlo A, Bellino L, Consoli D, Mori F, Zaninelli A, Baldereschi M, Cattarinussi
A, D'Alfonso MG, Gradia C, Sgherzi B, Pracucci G, Piccardi B, Polizzi B, Inzitari D,
Aliprandi ML, Bonsangue E, Locatelli P, Saurgnani P, Senziani LG, Tarantini D, Rota
RP, Boninsegni R, Feltrin T, Lancia E, Latella F, Monici G, Portera F, Ceccherini S,
Borello G, Contartese A, D'Amico A, D'Urzo G, Grillo GC, Mellea F, Ramondino
C, National Research Program: Progetto FAI. La Fibrillazione Atriale in Italia.
Prevalence of atrial fibrillation in the Italian elderly population and projections
from 2020 to 2060 for Italy and the European Union: the FAI Project. Europace
2019;21:1468-1475.
3. Kishore A, Vail A, Majid A, Dawson J, Lees KR, Tyrrell PJ, Smith CJ. Detection of
atrial fibrillation after ischemic stroke or transient ischemic attack: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Stroke 2014;45:520-526.
4. Hindricks G, Potpara T, Dagres N, et alet al 2020 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis
and management of atrial fibrillation developed in collaboration with the European
Association of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS). 2020.
5. Van Gelder IC, Healey JS, Crijns HJGM, Wang J, Hohnloser SH, Gold MR, Capucci
A, Lau C-P, Morillo CA, Hobbelt AH, Rienstra M, Connolly SJ. Duration of devicedetected subclinical atrial fibrillation and occurrence of stroke in ASSERT. Eur
Heart J 2017;38:1339-1344.
6. Diederichsen SZ, Haugan KJ, Kronborg C, Graff C, Hojberg S, Kober L, Krieger D,
Holst AG, Nielsen JB, Brandes A, Svendsen JH. Comprehensive evaluation of rhythm
monitoring strategies in screening for atrial fibrillation. Circulation 2020;141:1510-1522.
7. Mandrola J, Foy A, Naccarelli G. Screening for atrial fibrillation comes with many
snags. JAMA Internal Med 2018;178:1296-1298.
8. Freedman B. AF-SCREEN international collaboration. Eur Heart J 2016;37:
3490-3491.
9. Schnabel RB, Sullivan LM, Levy D, Pencina MJ, Massaro JM, D'Agostino RB,
Newton-Cheh C, Yamamoto JF, Magnani JW, Tadros TM, Kannel WB, Wang TJ,
Ellinor PT, Wolf PA, Vasan RS, Benjamin EJ. Development of a risk score for atrial
fibrillation (Framingham Heart Study): a community-based cohort study. Lancet
2009;373:739-745.
10. Schnabel RB, Aspelund T, Li G, Sullivan LM, Suchy-Dicey A, Harris TB, Pencina MJ,
D'Agostino RB, Levy D, Kannel WB, Wang TJ, Kronmal RA, Wolf PA, Burke GL,
Launer LJ, Vasan RS, Psaty BM, Benjamin EJ, Gudnason V, Heckbert SR. Validation
of an atrial fibrillation risk algorithm in whites and African Americans. Arch Internal
Med 2010;170:1909-1917.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/27/2625/6145319 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

the obstacles of AF screening uptake in Europe will be assessed in
structured interviews and a survey addressed at healthcare professionals and regulators. The project will review healthcare systems and infrastructure, national non-communicable disease plans, and measures
and policies addressing AF burden across European countries.
Following the Medical Research Council framework for evaluating
complex interventions the implementation of AF screening across participating European countries will be examined to determine how AF
screening is delivered in practice. The project will develop an understanding of how the mechanisms of impact of AF screening relate to
the mechanisms through which the intervention works and produces
changes in the intervention recipients. The country-specific context on
how factors external to the intervention that might influence how the
intervention operates will be examined. Implementation will be
assessed in a pilot study for opportunistic AF screening with a potential
roll-out across Europe.
Major considerations that AFFECT-EU will focus on


