11

CardioPulse

individualized, structured clinics and the differences in outcomes between men and women with AF. She established and implemented a
risk factor modification programme for patients with AF, which helped
create changes to the AF guidelines for patient management. Her main
interests include atrial fibrillation, risk factors, integrated care, gender,
eHealth, and epidemiology (Figure 7).

Melissa Middeldorp, PhD, University of Adelaide, Australia, is a postdoctoral research fellow whose PhD focused on risk factors for atrial
fibrillation (AF)-in particular, the management of risk factors through

Figure 7 Melissa Middeldorp, PhD.

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab734

Global Spotlights

ESC/HFA Quality of Care Centres: the ultimate
frontier in unifying heart failure management
1,2
Petar M. Seferovic
*, Massimo Piepoli 3, Marija Polovina2,4, Ivan Milinkovic2,4,
Giuseppe M. C. Rosano 5, and Andrew J. S. Coats6
1

Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Belgrade 11000, Serbia; 2Faculty of Medicine, Belgrade University, Belgrade 11000, Serbia; 3Heart Failure Unit, Cardiology, G. da Saliceto
Hospital, Piacenza I-29121, Italy; 4Department of Cardiology, University Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade 11000, Serbia; 5Department of Medical Sciences, IRCCS San Raffaele,
Rome 00163, Italy; and 6Faculty of Medicine, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7HL, UK

Heart failure (HF) is a major public health concern and a leading global
cause of mortality, hospitalization, disability, and high associated healthcare costs. According to the recent Heart Failure Association of the
ESC (HFA) Atlas survey of the 42 European Society of Cardiology
(ESC) member countries, with a population of 800 million people,
the burden of HF in this region is estimated to involve 14 million
patients, 2.5 million hospitalisations, and 2.4 million new cases annually.1 Multidisciplinary management of HF, defined as patientcentred, multi-specialist and coordinated care from primary to tertiary

*Corresponding author. Tel: th381 11 361 47 38, Email: seferovic.petar@gmail.com

levels, has been shown to effectively improve outcomes and optimize
the utilization of resources.2 However, the HFA Atlas has demonstrated that there are significant disparities in healthcare organization
and available resources for its management across Europe that result
in the heterogenous delivery of contemporary diagnostic modalities
and guideline directed therapies (GDT).1 Furthermore, in most countries, dedicated institutions for HF management (i.e. HF centres) are
sparse and insufficient to accommodate for the growing demands for
expert HF care.1

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/1/11/6413707 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 6 Simon Kraler, MD.

12

treatment of HF patients and timely referral to higher levels of care, as
well as to ensure regular follow-up and optimization of GDT.
Specialized QCCs (district hospitals with intensive care units and facilities for cardiac catheterization and device implantation) should offer
diagnostic assessment and initial treatment of HF patients either referred from community QCCs, or admitted for acute/decompensated
HF. Advanced QCCs include national reference centres capable of
providing all necessary diagnostic and therapeutic management including for the most severe or advanced HF patients, including candidates
and recipients of heart transplants or mechanical circulatory support.3
The essential features of the community, specialized, and advanced
QCCs are presented in Figure 1.
As of June 2021, a pilot phase of QCC implementation has commenced involving different-level QCCs in 10 ESC member countries
(Russia, Lithuania, Poland, Croatia, Serbia, Italy, Romania, Greece,
Israel, and Egypt) (Figure 2). and on June 17, 2021, the first QCC became a reality, when official documents have been signed by institutional representatives (QCC coordinators) of the first accredited
QCC in Belgrade, Serbia. This was soon followed by fast-pace confirmation of participation from candidate centres in all 10 pilot countries.
Pilot Quality of Care Centre's directors and coordinators are reported
in the Appendix. The beginning of the pilot phase marks a cornerstone
in the future of HF management and gives hope for the fulfilment of
the longstanding ESC/HFA endeavour to reduce disparities in delivery
and quality of HF care in its member countries. The impact of the project will continue to grow as it extends to new countries and the benefits of standardised multidisciplinary HF care become apparent. This
QCC project will be integrated with the HFA-led educational initiatives that offer courses and programmes of great benefit to boost professional skills and aptitude in HF management.

Figure 1 Three levels of European Society of Cardiology/Heart Failure Association Quality of Care Centers. CCU, coronary care units; CRT, cardiac resynchronization therapy; ESC, European Society of Cardiology; HF, heart failure; HFA, Heart Failure Association; HTx, heart transplantation;
ICD, implantable cardioverter defibrillators; ICU, intensive care units; MCS, mechanical circulatory support; QCC, Quality of Care Centers.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/1/11/6413707 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

The HFA has long recognized the need for providing standardized multidisciplinary management of HF in its member countries
and recognized the value of expert HF centres as driving improved.
In 2018, the HFA Board named the development of multidisciplinary Quality of Care Centres (QCCs) as one of its strategic priorities. The QCC project has been approved by the HFA Board and
the ESC Management Group. Following detailed analysis of the
existing European models (in Germany, Italy, and Spain), and extensive discussions within ESC and between the HFA and National
Heart Failure Societies, the QCC project was launched as an ESC/
HFA-accredited network of centres that provide multidisciplinary
care for HF, from primary to tertiary levels. The QCC project is
considered as one of the milestones in affirming the reach and influence of ESC/HFA in the countries involved.
The principal goal of QCCs is to improve standards of care and adherence to GDT in accordance with ESC/HFA accreditation requirements. QCC implementation should be embedded within existing
healthcare systems. Coordination between centres will facilitate seamless transitions of care (from primary to tertiary levels and vice versa)
and facilitate the referral of complex and advanced HF patients. QCCs
will also promote regional and international networking and support
education, professional cooperation, and scientific exchange. QCCs
will bring bilateral benefits for the centres and ESC/HFA, not only as
the best approach to improve standards of care, but also to advance
national and international visibility of the participating centres. They
are also expected to enhance centres' cost-effectiveness.
The ESC/HFA model includes three types of QCCs: community,
specialized, and advanced. Community QCCs are primary healthcare
institutions, or community-based hospitals and rehabilitation centres
and cardiology practices. Their role is to offer initial assessment and

CardioPulse

13

CardioPulse

The aim is to establish an international network of QCCs throughout
ESC countries. following review of feedback from the pilot phase and
the incorporation of any appropriate changes. The maintenance of the
project requires a permanent structure within the ESC/HFA responsible
for QCC accreditation and recertification, as well as recruitment of new
centres. The supervision and governance of the QCC project is the responsibility of ESC/HFA QCC Task Force in collaboration with
National Heart Failure Societies and QCC coordinators at participating
centres. Accredited QCCs will be offered recertification at regular
intervals, depending on centres' compliance with accreditation protocols and provision of satisfactory indicators of quality of care.
The QCC project will face many challenges with implementation
into the existing healthcare systems of ESC member countries that significantly differ with respect to organization, funding, drug reimbursement, patient referral policies, and availability of diagnostic and
therapeutic resources. The key to surmounting these obstacles will be
the commitment, adaptability, and persistence of all parties involved to
overcome difficulties and to bring this important project to reality.

(Hospital Therapy Clinic of I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical
University, Russian Federation), Piotr Ponikowski, Ewa Jankowska
(Department of heart diseases, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw,

Poland), Giedrius Davidavicius, Jelena Celutkiene
(Vilnius University
Hospital Santaros Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania), Albinas Naudzi
unas,

Diana Zaliaduonyte
(Kaunas Hospital of Lithuania University of Health
Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania), Davor Milicic, Duska Glavas (Department
of Cardiovascular diseases, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Croatia),
Milika Asanin, Marija Polovina (University Clinical Center of Serbia,
Belgrade, Serbia), Massimo Piepoli (Unit of Heart Failure and
Cardiomyopathy, of the Cardiology Unit at the Guglielmo da Saliceto
Hospital, Piacenza Local Health Authority, Azienda Sanitaria Locale di
Piacenza Italy), Ovidiu Chioncel (Emergency Institute for Cardiovascular
diseases Prof. C.C. Iliescu, Bucharest, Romania), Offer Amir, Israel
Gotsman (Heart Institute, Hadassah Medical Centre, Jerusalem Israel).
John Parissis, Gerasimos Filippatos (National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens University Hospital Attikon), and Magdy
Abdelhamid (Qasr Al-Ainy Cairo University Hospital-CAIRO, Egypt).

Conflict of interest: none declared.

1. Seferovic PM, Vardas P, Jankowska EA et alet al. The Heart Failure Association
Atlas: Heart Failure Epidemiology and Management Statistics 2019. Eur J Heart Fail
2021;23:906-914.
2. Riley JP, Masters J. Practical multidisciplinary approaches to heart failure management for improved patient outcome. Eur Heart J Suppl 2016;18:G43-G52.
3. Seferovic PM, Piepoli MF, Lopatin Y et alet al; Heart Failure Association of the
European Society of Cardiology. Quality of Care Centres Programme: design and
accreditation document. Eur J Heart Fail 2020;22:763-774.

Appendix: Pilot Quality of Care
Centre's directors/coordinators
Yuri Lopatin, Alla Ledyaeva (Volgograd State Medical University,
Volgograd, Russian Federation), Yuri Belenkov, Maria Kozhevnikova

References

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab451

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/1/11/6413707 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 2 Countries participating in European Society of Cardiology/Heart Failure Association Quality of Care Centers pilot phase.


