2323

Cardiopulse

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab035

Getting lost in the fog of the pandemic: insights
from the 'second wave' of COVID-19
Massimo Mapelli

1,2

*

Last Wednesday, at 9 p.m., E.C.-a Combonian brother born in a small
town in the Dolomites 74 years ago and resident in Uganda for more
than 40 years-died. He was a friend of mine. The news arrived at the
end of my afternoon shift in the COVID-19 ward of my hospital, via
text message. I squinted my eyes to make out those words, blurred by
the passage through multiple transparent layers: the plastic film that
wrapped the cell phone to avoid contamination, the bulky protective
visor, and finally my glasses, fogged up by my heavy breathing under
the double-protective mask.
E. had fallen ill about a month earlier, initially with a slight malaise
and dry cough, then with a picture of progressive respiratory failure.
Initially, he was managed at home within the compound of the hospital
where he lived and worked-a 600-bed non-profit hospital in

northern Uganda that he had literally helped to build with his own
hands-and then, as the situation worsened, he was transported on a
daring journey by jeep at full speed and with the oxygen tank valve fully
open, to the largest hospital of Kampala, the Ugandan capital 400 km
further south. Despite all possible care and assistance, including prolonged non-invasive ventilation, he suddenly deteriorated to his death.
At the same time, more than 5000 km to the north, at bed 181, a
79-year-old patient whom I had admitted a few days earlier from the
emergency room with uncomplicated COVID-19 pneumonia, and
who, until 2 days before had been breathing in ambient air, was moved
to intensive care and intubated for a sudden respiratory crisis. He died
24 h later. The day before, I had called his son, telling him that his father
was improving.

Figure 1 'Second wave' of COVID-19 in Lombardy and in our hospital (October 12th-November 21st). Our hospital, a tertiary reference centre
for cardiovascular disease, was identified during the pandemic as a 'hub' centre for cardiovascular emergencies. However, since the beginning of
November, given the epidemiological pressure with thousands of new cases of COVID-19 per day, a dedicated area for these patients has been
opened.

*Corresponding author. Email: massimo.mapelli@cardiologicomonzino.it

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/24/2323/6161230 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

1
Heart Failure Unit, Centro Cardiologico Monzino IRCCS, Via Parea 4, 20138 Milan, Italy; and 2Cardiovascular Section, Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health,
University of Milan, Milan, Italy

2324

Cardiopulse

Italy, and Milan, in particular, is facing in these weeks a terrible 'second wave' of the COVID-19 pandemic1 (Figure 1). After a relatively
normal summer, in which the measures of containment and prevention
have loosened, since the beginning of October, the epidemiological
curve has started once again to rise exponentially. Hospitals have again
fallen under pressure, and the healthcare workers, having physically
and psychologically been prepared since last spring,2 have once again
found themselves actors in a bad movie they no longer wanted to participate in (Figure 2).
As in a mocking and barely credible script, this 'second wave', which
had been widely announced, found our country once again unprepared, as one might be suddenly surprised by a fog bank while driving
at night. In half a day, when emergencies departments were already being assailed by patients with interstitial pneumonia, part of my ward,
the heart failure unit of a regional referral centre, was isolated with
plasterboards covered with biohazard stickers. Unlike the first phase
of the pandemic, this time it took much longer to find volunteer healthcare workers for the new COVID-19 area.
Every morning I take my son to the nursery, where the nannies test
the temperature both during entry and departure. They know that I
am a doctor, but to avoid panic, I tell them that our hospital, mainly
dedicated to cardiology, is spared by COVID-19. Usually, less than an
hour later, I am dressed like some sort of diver and, together with the
tireless interns who have interrupted their training to help us in this
battle, I spend my shift raising or lowering patients' oxygen to try to
make them feel better, often without success. Since the beginning of

October, some colleagues have already fallen ill and in addition to the
fear of becoming infected, the enthusiasm is dampened by the everincreasing number of shifts.
In the atmosphere muffled by personal protective equipment , incredible stories are recounted that seem to come from some Dantean
work (Figure 3). An oxygen-dependent Down's syndrome patient
made a drawing for his mother at home with a red heart and 2 days
later, he found her in the bed next to him with respiratory failure.
Currently, they are both improving, relieved to at least be together
during this crisis.
A former professional football player, with an infectious clinical
picture, complicated by severe peripheral embolization, was transferred to another centre. His leg will be probably be amputated.
At the end of the corridor, on the other side of the glass door that
hermetically closes the ward, in our cardiopulmonary laboratory, we
keep testing patients of the COVID-19 'first wave' 6 months after the
discharge. The data for the first 100 are quite reassuring. In the hopes
of infusing some optimism, we deliver that good news to those lying in
bed, attached to oxygen.
Triggered by some politicians and misinformation, almost every day
some patients' relatives ask us why we are not giving them hydroxychloroquine and hyperimmune plasma.3
My father, a general practitioner close to retirement, like many
out-of-hospital doctors abandoned by the healthcare system, has
extended his visiting hours, and he visits patients with the windows
open despite the cold weather to reduce the viral load in the air.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/24/2323/6161230 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 2 Insights from the COVID-19 second wave. (A) The entrance of Centro Cardiologico Monzino, shrouded in the evening fog. Most of the
elective activities have been suspended and entire departments reconverted to cope with the pandemic. (B) 'Go back to doing hospital checks without any fear', the leaflets for patients printed at the beginning of September lie intact in the binders. (C) To reduce the contagion, beds monitored
with a camera have been set up in an emergency room area for COVID-19 patients waiting for hospitalization. (D) At the shift change, we often take
a picture to bid good luck to our colleagues. The photos are all blurred because of the plastic coating in which the cell phones are wrapped. (E)
Brother E.'s body was transported to the hospital in Northern Uganda where he lived and worked. He was buried here after an outdoor ceremony,
broadcast in the media and on social networks.

2325

Cardiopulse

When they are not picking up their prescriptions in silence, patients
complain about the flu vaccines that seem to be unobtainable this
year. In the evening, at home, everybody waits for the bulletin of
contagions and deaths, which are still on the rise, despite the lockdown. The cell phone rings continuously reporting updates and
bringing news of acquaintances and family members at home with
fever.
During the hard lockdown we experienced in March, the
news reports alternated between fear and a feeling of solidarity
and trust for doctors and hospitals; now half of the news reports
deal with a large group of deniers who publicly claim that the pandemic
is all a hoax. In the centre of Milan, a mural dedicated to doctors and
nurses in the frontline of the pandemic was smeared with paint and,
last week, a first-aid team was attacked by a group of deniers.
In sub-Saharan Africa, a stone's throw from the equator, fog is not a
frequent phenomenon, but when it arrives, it leaves everyone dismayed. Brother E. is part of the history of northern Uganda. He has
fought rebels, malaria, even Ebola.4,5 The last time I spoke to him, in
the shade of a big tree at the entrance of the orphanage he built near
the hospital, he told me about when an elephant attacked his jeep with
its tusks. That time he survived by a miracle. An infinitely smaller virus,
born in a Chinese market on the other side of the world, having landed
in Europe by the airliner and now spreading almost everywhere, finished the job that even a mighty elephant, could not. It is 4 p.m.; at this
time last April, the balconies were full of people clapping their hands
and singing their support to hospital workers. As I now look out my
window, all I can see is fog.

Acknowledgements
This article is dedicated to the memory of Brother Elio Croce, may he
rest in peace. I thank Prof. Piergiuseppe Agostoni, Elisabetta Salvioni,
and Michela Palmieri for their constant and unconditional support. All
authors contributed to the writing and/or revision of the manuscript
and approved it before submission. The manuscript is not under consideration elsewhere at present and data have not been previously
published. 'The authors do hereby declare that all illustrations and figures in the manuscript are entirely original and do not require reprint
permission.'
Conflict of interest: none declared.

References
1. Istituto Superiore Sanita. Integrated surveillance of COVID-19 in Italy. ISS https://
www.epicentro.iss.it/en/coronavirus/bollettino/Report-COVID-2019_18_novem
ber_2020.pdf (19 November 2020).
2. Mapelli M. What COVID-19 is taking away from us. Eur Heart J 2020;41:2053-2055.
3. Editors. Dying in a leadership vacuum. N Engl J Med 2020;383:1479-1480.
4. Croce E. Piu Forte di Ebola, 1st edn. Ares, 2001.
5. Croce E. Diari di Guerra e di Pace. Un Missionario Comboniano Trentino in Nord Uganda
(1996-2004), 1st edn. Curcu & Genovese Ass, Trento (TN), Italy, 2016.

Massimo Mapelli
Heart Failure Unit
Centro Cardiologico Monzino, IRCCS,
Milan (Italy)
massimo.mapelli@ccfm.it

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/24/2323/6161230 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 3 Insights from the COVID-19 second wave. (A) A Down's syndrome patient made a drawing for his mother at home with a red heart. (B) I
met Brother E. 6 years ago during this time of year. He was accompanying a young disabled girl to her parents' hut, in the middle of the Ugandan
Savannah, so that they could spend Christmas together. (C) With the arrival of COVID-19, the entire department was disrupted. Tighter spaces
forced us to take advantage of even the narrowest corners. (D,E) Christmas decorations, set up in anticipation of the holiday season, give a surreal
touch to the ward. Patients will spend Christmas alone, away from their families.


