2622

CardioPulse

Devices that sit on the skin are minimally invasive platforms
of electronics in the style of a band-aid strip and contain an
array of photodetectors and light-emitting diodes, to monitor patient
data. Smartphones can be used as monitors, and upload data to the
cloud.

Vulnerable patients

Prof. Rogers, who has a research focus on nano and molecular scale
fabrication, characteristics of soft materials, bio-inspired and bio-integrated technologies, said cardiac monitoring devices and innovative
tools are an important area of interest to the group, which collaborates with interventional cardiologists.
He remains acutely aware of the importance of softer materials in
maintaining patient compliance. The skin-based devices use silicon and
related compound semiconductors to support the electronics, structured in open mesh architectures embedded in soft silicone elastomers. This combines the rigid materials with soft flexible materials in a
hybrid formation, paving the way for cost-effective manufacturing and
devices that are more compatible for the skin.
'If a device creates any irritation or discomfort at the skin interfaces,
most patients will not use it. You can develop a fantastic device with
spectacular measurement capabilities but it is meaningless if patients
are unable or unwilling to use it'.
With engineering activities based at a main campus at Evanston, plus
labs in the major medical complexes of Chicago, the unit has ongoing
trials of devices for cardiology, neurology, neonatology, paediatrics, nephrology, and dermatology. Patients with heart failure, cardiomyopathy, coronary artery disease, and stroke survivors are benefitting from
this type of monitoring.
Conflict of interest: none declared.

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab101

Heroes, politics and media: the unshakable
medical practice in the pandemic
Dimitrios A. Vrachatis

1

*, Spyridon G. Deftereos1, and Alexandra Lansky2

1
2nd Department of Cardiology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 1 Rimini, Chaidari, 124 62 Athens, Greece; and 2Section of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA

COVID-19 has turned the medical world upside down and sideways.
Quite rightly, all hands are on deck in the medical and scientific world
to fight the pandemic. With the alarm bell ringing, some important and
unexpected consequences for medicine and medical science have
gone largely unnoticed. In this article, we touch on some of these, as
they are worthy of more attention.
The pandemic has reprioritized healthcare as a top, perhaps the top,
public concern of our time. The global scope and sobering death toll of
the pandemic have put physicians, other healthcare providers, and the
healthcare system into a spotlight usually reserved for politics and
show business. As a result, pandemic-related scientific research has become a point of focus not just for medical and public health academia
but for mainstream journalists and mass media. This attention appears
to have influenced the way in which human and monetary resources
have been allocated among specific fields of anti-COVID-19 research,
compared to the way in which they would have been allocated had the
public and political leaders not been involved.
*Corresponding author. Tel: th306945081834, Email: dvrachatis@gmail.com

On the front lines, medical specialists have had to rediscover their
early training talents and revert to being primary care and/or critical
care physicians in order to cover the onslaught of incoming COVID19 patients. Exempli gratia, super-specialized cardiology specialists
have had to rediscover their innate bonds with internal medicine and
recapture old skill sets by necessity to face the emergent need.1
Moreover, with no evidence-based treatment protocols, healthcare
providers were forced to rely solely on their fundamental knowledge,
general experience, and clinical instincts. Throughout the world offlabel or 'compassionate' treatment methods necessarily became the
norm, rather than the exception. Accustomed to relying on expertise
and data, physicians found themselves under-equipped.
In this environment of uncertainty-and given that they were risking
their own lives in the fight-the people behind the personal protective
equipment were bathed in a warm cloud of unprecedented trust and
gratitude by the community; they became heroes. The hopeful among
us sees this as the beginning of a renewed bond between scientists,

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/27/2622/6153980 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

A particular emphasis is on working with vulnerable patients at both
ends of the spectrum: in neonatal paediatric health and elderly
patients.
Neonates, he said, are a major challenge because of the sensitivity of
the skin, and small limbs and muscles, and that has led development of
their most sophisticated and sensitive platforms.
The band-aid style devices, for 24/7 care of neonates, applied to relevant parts of the anatomy are battery-free and use wireless power
and data transfer, dispensing of the 'primitive and constraining technology' of cables to allow critical skin-to-skin contact to continue between mother and child.
With high mortality during childbirth in LMICs (Low and Middle
Income Countries) these devices, piloted in Chicago hospitals, have
been successfully applied in resource-limited countries such as
Zambia, Ghana, and Kenya, with wireless devices measuring the cardiac health of the mother, foetus, and of the neonate during and immediately after birth.

Patient-friendly materials

CardioPulse

2623

clinicians, and the public and the beginning of a reversal in the previous
decline in the public trust in the medical and scientific communities.
Meanwhile, the ongoing rush of pandemic-related bio-medical research has already provided the initial outcomes of both randomized
and observational studies and are starting to form a roadmap to
evidence-based practice. A standard of care for COVID-19 patients
has begun to form, with the boundaries of this novel disease starting to
be delineated. Our capacity to handle both in- and out-of-hospital consequences of the pandemic has improved (and public expectations
have again started to rise). As always, along with the incremental gains
in knowledge, more uncertainties have appeared.
In normal times, although medical uncertainties may bring nervousness in everyday practice, they present a potential for growth and exploration2 and thus are not entirely bad. However, this time, these
uncertainties were not reviewed in expert circles in the context of
medical debates but rather projected as unfiltered headlines to the
public without restrictions or discussion of nuances typical of scholarly
scientific debate. Individuals who are not equipped to understand the
science or the statistics are influencing or even dominating the debate,
with consequences that move through the political system into policy
decisions and, in day-to-day practice giving patients a false sense of
knowledge that can cause them to make poor decisions about their
treatment. The medical community has an ethical duty to resist the
pressure from the unknowledgeable and hold fast to scientific rigour
and due diligence, especially in the case of public beliefs on
vaccination.3

We physicians take the patient by the hand, inform him/her about
the available data about outcomes and risks in light of particular circumstances, and help him/her to make the best therapeutic choices in
light of these circumstances. Notably, 'shared decision-making' is an active interplay between the physician and the patient. However, the
shared decision-making model is problematic in the treatment of
COVID-19 patients because (i) physicians lack the normal evidence
base and (ii) in many cases the patients have formed strong beliefs
about the disease based on 'information' from sources who have no
real knowledge.
Medical knowledge in the field of the COVID-19 is constantly evolving and thus is not framed in a safe harbour of guidelines or even a
wide consensus. In consequence, some physicians may not be comfortable with the implementation of new therapies -even vaccines- either because strong evidence is lacking and they are not entirely
convinced of their overall safety and effectiveness or because this uncertainty simply makes them feel vulnerable to potential malpractice
claims. Have the current educational priorities of evidence-based and
guideline-directed medicine, in the context of a litigious environment
paralyzed physicians when faced with a disease like COVID-19 for
which there are no 'safe harbours'? Are physicians unable to digest
best-available but shaky evidence and make decisions for their patients
or are they just unwilling to do so?
The vaccine situation presents a particularly acute case for this
question. First, the normal consultation environment will be missing.
The patient will not be feeling ill and thus will not have the usual

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/27/2622/6153980 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 1 London Board of Health searching the city for cholera during the 1832 epidemic; Lithograph, 1832; Wellcome Collection UK; https://well
comecollection.org/works/d7994mnn; UK; License: CC4.0.

2624

psychological dependency that supports his trust in the physician.
Moreover, there will be no direct human interaction, which also
supports that trust. Thus, there is no scope for the art of medicine
as defined by Voltaire: 'amusing the patient while nature cures the
disease'. Second, the widespread and unwarranted fear of childhood
vaccines among the public has morphed into a fear of vaccines in
general.
Beyond novel knowledge and discoveries, including rapid development and approval of novel approaches to vaccines, established
practices also have been put in question. Indeed, during the first
months of this pandemic, a thrombolysis-first approach for ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) was (though unfounded, as
proved later) proposed as a means of overcoming logistic issues
and limitation of in-hospital contamination.4 As expected, acute
care cardiologists found themselves in an admittedly disconcerting
albeit transient situation. The expeditious evaluation and accumulation of acute STEMI care data under COVID-19, reaffirmed that
established guidelines and time-targets for primary percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) should continue to be followed and
guidance was issued accordingly.5
As our practice of medicine is confronted by its first pandemic, the
call of the medical community is neither to create nor to exaggerate
divisions but rather to recall our sacred Hippocratic oath, to adopt an
empathetic approach and treat the sick to the very best of our ability.
Beyond handling the fears and uncertainties of our patients,2,6 our responsibility is to be resolute in our scientific integrity and maintain our

Figure 3 Hope; by Hiram Powers; Smithsonian American Art
Museum; http://n2t.net/ark:/65665/vk73b21beaf-efa5-47f5-8c5c-13a0
e3801698; License: CC0.

systematic approach in gathering and reading the lines of scientific evidence (and ignore the distractions of politics and mass media). The setting is unfamiliar, but priorities are set, resources are available,
scientific evidence has started to accumulate, a new and firm bond of
trust between scientists and the community is palpable. 'Nothing in life
is to be feared, it is only to be understood. Now is the time to understand more, so that we may fear less.', Marie Curie.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Robert MacDonald, JD for reviewing
the manuscript.
Conflict of interest: none declared.

Corresponding Author
Dimitrios A. Vrachatis M.D.
National and Kapodistrian
University of Athens
Greece
dvrachatis@gmail.com

References
1. Vrachatis DA, Deftereos S, Giannopoulos G. The role of cardiology specialties in
times of crisis. Eur Heart J 2020;41:2935-2936.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/27/2622/6153980 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 2 Venus Healing Aeneas; Merry Joseph Blondel; about
1820; Restricted gift of Pamela and Roger Hull through the Old
Masters Society https://api.artic.edu/api/v1/artworks/226550/mani
fest.json; License: CC0.

CardioPulse

2625

CardioPulse

2. Wellbery C. The value of medical uncertainty? Lancet (Lond, Engl). 2010;
375:1686-1687.
3. Cadeddu C, Daugbjerg S, Ricciardi W, Rosano A. Beliefs towards vaccination and
trust in the scientific community in Italy. Vaccine 2020;38:6609-6617.
4. Vrachatis DA, Deftereos S, Stefanini GG. STEMI in COVID-19 patients:
thrombolysis-first approach could yield more risk than benefit. Eur Heart J
2020;41:4141-4142.

5. Chieffo A, Stefanini GG, Price S, Barbato E, Tarantini G, Karam N, Moreno R,
Buchanan GL, Gilard M, Halvorsen S, Huber K, James S, Neumann F-J, Mollmann H,
Roffi M, Tavazzi G, Mauri Ferre J, Windecker S, Dudek D, Baumbach A. EAPCI position statement on invasive management of acute coronary syndromes during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Eur Heart J 2020;41:1839-1851.
6. Uncertainty in medicine. Lancet (Lond, Engl) 2010;375:1666.

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab050

Daniel Engler 1,2, Hein Heidbuchel3, and Renate B. Schnabel
AFFECT-EU Investigators

1,2

*; for the

1
Department of Cardiology, University Heart and Vascular Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany; 2German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK) Partner Site
Hamburg/Kiel/Lubeck; and ; and 3Department of Cardiology, Antwerp University and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium

Owing to the demographic changes, we are facing an epidemic of atrial
fibrillation (AF) in the aging population with a prevalence of approximately 2.5-3%1 (twice as high in men and 5% prevalence in individuals
65 years) and a projected doubling of this number by 2050.2 Atrial fibrillation is often asymptomatic with its first manifestation being debilitating stroke in more than 10 of patients.3 Atrial fibrillation produces
significant healthcare costs for the European society and precludes

healthy aging. The European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines
recommend screening for AF to prevent complications and optimize
treatment, including the use of highly effective oral anticoagulation
(OAC) in patients at risk of stroke.4 However, questions on whom to
screen, how to screen, and the optimal setting for screening with highest efficiency remain unanswered. In this context, the EU-funded
AFFECT-EU project (www.affect-eu.eu, Figure 1) aims at developing a

Figure 1 Consortium members and geographic origin. All consortium partners are named in the supplement.
*Corresponding author. Email: r.schnabel@uke.de

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/27/2622/6153980 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Digital, risk-based screening for atrial
fibrillation in the European community-the
AFFECT-EU project funded by the
European Union


