3039

Cardiopulse

Conflict of interest: none declared.

References
1. Tavolinejad H, Soltani D, Zargaran A, Rezaeizadeh H, Vasheghani-Farahani A. The
story of amiodarone. Eur Heart J 2019;40:2758-2759.

2. Petrovska BB. Historical review of medicinal plants' usage. Pharmacogn Rev
2012;6:1-5.
3. Pan S-Y, Litscher G, Gao S-H, Zhou S-F, Yu Z-L, Chen H-Q, Zhang S-F, Tang M-K,
Sun J-N, Ko K-M. Historical perspective of traditional indigenous medical practices:
the current renaissance and conservation of herbal resources. Evid Based
Complement Alternat Med 2014;2014:1-20.
4. Zarshenas MM, Zargaran A. A review on the Avicenna's contribution to the field
of cardiology. Int J Cardiol 2015;182:237-241.
5. Avicenna. The Book on Drugs for Cardiovascular Diseases. (Translated to Persina by
H. Razavi Borghei), Tehran: Nashre Ney, 2009.
6. Bahraini A, Dadmehr M, Sadeghpour O. The effects of tastes on cardiac function.
Int J Cardiol 2018;260:171.
7. Tsujimoto T, Imai K, Kanda S, Kakei M, Kajio H, Sugiyama T. Sweet taste disorder
and vascular complications in patients with abnormal glucose tolerance. Int J
Cardiol 2016;221:637-641. doi:10.1016/j.ijcard.2016.07.062
8. Bloxham CJ, Foster SR, Thomas WG. A bitter taste in your heart. Front Physiol
2020;11.
9. Lee SJ, Depoortere I, Hatt H. Therapeutic potential of ectopic olfactory and taste
receptors. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2019;18:116-138.
10. Shiina Y, Funabashi N, Lee K, Toyoda T, Sekine T, Honjo S, Hasegawa R, Kawata
T, Wakatsuki Y, Hayashi S, Murakami S, Koike K, Daimon M, Komuro I. Relaxation
effects of lavender aromatherapy improve coronary flow velocity reserve in
healthy men evaluated by transthoracic Doppler echocardiography. Int J Cardiol
2008;129:193-197. doi:10.1016/j.ijcard.2007.06.064

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab076

How a new drug is born
Andrea Caporali

1+

, Steven Fawell2+, and Maurizio Scaltriti

2

*+

1
University/BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Science, the University of Edinburgh, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh, Scotland, EH16 4TJ, UK; and 2Early Oncology,
AstraZeneca, 35 Gatehouse Park, Waltham, MA 02451, USA

Despite the unmet medical needs in the prevention and treatment of
cardiovascular disease, the development of new cardiovascular drugs
and investments are declining compared with many other therapeutic
areas such as oncology.1 The lagging in drug development is partly due
to challenges in pre-clinical discoveries and the high cost in conducting
cardiovascular clinical trials.2
A critical first step in the drug discovery and development process is
the selection, identification, and/or validation of the target itself
(Figure 1). This can range from simply new drug 'best in class' profiles
for known targets to true de novo target identification. The latter has
been helped immeasurably by new high-fidelity technology platforms
including next-generation DNA sequencing and tools like CRISPR that
allows the precise modulation of gene function by gene deletion or
more subtle changes such as point mutations or catalytically dead
enzymes. Ideally, a firm understanding of the disease relevance (and
even patient subpopulations) and potential therapeutic impact of target inhibition should be at least partly in hand before beginning. These
techniques offer opportunities to identify new drug targets for cardiovascular disease and provide a more accurate phenotype of patients
with cardiovascular disease, potentially allowing a personalized cardiovascular medicine approach.
Once a target has been identified, the drug discovery process can
begin (Figure 1). This could simply involve generating function modulating monoclonal antibodies or recombinant proteins or for intracellular
targets the small molecule screening process. For novel targets, this

*Corresponding author. Email: maurizio.scaltriti@astrazeneca.com
+
These authors contributed equally to this study.

typically involves assay development and then high-throughput screening of large compound libraries or DNA-encoded libraries that capture
enormous molecular diversity. Hits from these efforts need considerable further optimization to be useful even as probe molecules (the hit
to lead process) and yet further optimization still before being of high
enough quality for clinical evaluation, referred to as lead optimization.
Target specific assays allow the characterization of potency and selectivity as well as activity in appropriate in vitro cellular efficacy models.
More general assays measure solubility and permeability, compound
stability and begin to explore drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics
(DMPK) and oral bioavailability across multiple preclinical species
(typically mouse, rat, and dog, and with in vitro assays to predict
human properties. All these assessments and the exploration of
structure-activity relationships (SAR) through the DMTA cycle (design, make test, analyse) allow the chemists to juggle often opposing
characteristics in search of the optimal balance. Increasing potency often leverages hydrophobic target interactions and comes with decreased solubility, compounds must be soluble enough to dissolve in
the GI tract but be permeable enough to escape from the gut and be
cell penetrant.
Once compounds of adequate potency and activity are available
with enough bioavailability in vivo efficacy can be assessed in relevant
animal models. Analysis of PKPDE relationship, the relationship between pharmacokinetic drug exposure to pharmacodynamic drug
effect and thus to efficacy is then used to understand the

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/32/3039/6170956 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

aromatherapy has antioxidant, sedative-hypnotic, anxiolytic, and antidepressant activities. It also has beneficial effects on the neuroendocrine system.10
In conclusion, Avicenna made a great contribution to the field of cardiology and discussed some basic herbal actions in his specific book on
cardiovascular medicine. He mentioned the effects of aroma and taste
in cardioactive medications. According to his claims, aromatic plants
with an astringent taste have strong cardiotonic effects. Current findings show that olfactory and taste receptors are also expressed in several extra-nasal and extra-oral tissues, which are involved in
miscellaneous biological processes. These receptors, as common chemoreceptors, may have affect physiological and pathological processes,
which may have unwrapped therapeutic potential. To this aim, further
evaluations are needed.

3040

Cardiopulse

throughput drug evaluation technologies, coupled with approaches to evaluate in vitro and in vivo phenotype, have collectively identified new drug targets for cardiovascular disease. (1) The disease relevance of the target and the identification of the potential therapeutic impact of target inhibition
are critical prerequisites at the beginning of drug developments. (2) Drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics (DMPK) assessments and the exploration of structure-activity relationships (SAR) through the DMTA cycle (design, make test, and analyse) allow the optimization of drug development.
(3) Despite the identification of cardiovascular targets, fewer molecules in the cardiovascular research pipeline compared with other therapeutic
areas are ultimately approved. The high costs of the trials, the uncertainty of the regulatory review process, and the low participation of patients are
the main gatekeepers behind few drug approvals for cardiovascular disease. (4) Future clinical trials should integrate patient-centred endpoints and information from different phases of the trials to improve the development of novel cardiovascular compounds. Created with BioRender.com.

optimal candidate drug profile needed for humans, and these final
considerations feedback into the DMTA cycle now with a view to
optimizing and fine-tuning compound features to be fit for purpose
in humans. Final considerations include predicted human dose,
compound synthetic routes and simplicity and the potential for
drug-drug interactions or time-dependent inhibition or induction
of metabolizing enzymes (notably CYPs) that could impact
co-dosed medications. Finally, as optimization zeros in on the final
candidate compound an analysis of drug safety is also begun, culminating in IND enabling GLP studies. There are principles for maximizing the success of this process, from detailed target validation
to identifying the safety concerns and margins, patient biomarkers,
and consequent selection.
A clear example of this pipeline's potential in cardiovascular drug
development is demonstrated in the development of PCSK9 inhibitors.3 The success of this strategy was also determined by the identification of a highly predictive biomarker (low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol) to allow validation and optimization of novel PCSK9
inhibitors.

At this point, the 'best' candidate molecule is chosen for engaging in
clinical testing and safety. Usually, this process begins with the socalled 'dose escalation', where a limited group of patients is treated
with increasing doses (initially very low) of the drug until the maximal
tolerated dose (MTD) is found. A classical dose-escalation design
involves groups of three patients on whom adverse events of the drug
are studied and reported following a fairly rigid and accepted protocol.
Once the MTD is found, a lower, more tolerable (but still active)
dose is chosen to conduct phase I trials where the number and typology of patients enrolled will vary upon the type of drug and statistical considerations. As a matter of fact, despite the primary
purpose of phase I trials is to assess the safety and tolerability of the
investigational drug, there is no doubt that some clinical responses
are awaited and expected. These first 'signals' often guide the design
and/or patient selection for the following phase II studies, where a
higher number of patients with a more uniform disease type/stage is
typically enrolled.
Phase II clinical trials are often the moment of truth. A subpopulation of patients with the same disease and/or alterations is treated with

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/32/3039/6170956 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 1 Cardiovascular drug development: pipelines, challenges, and areas of improvement. The application of genomic research and high-

3041

Cardiopulse

mechanisms and, consequently, investigate new strategies to potentiate or prolong its activity, perhaps by testing its combination with
other drugs. Nowadays, strong translational research programs are
present in many advanced academic centres and in most of the big
pharmaceutical companies.
Leveraging academic research and industry collaborations to identify
novel therapeutic targets through pre-clinical development and innovate the study design in clinical trials would provide a positive path forward in cardiovascular drug development.
Conflict of interest: A.C. has no conflict of interest. S.F. and M.S. are
Astrazeneca employee and hold AstraZeneca equity.

References
1. McClellan M, Brown N, Califf RM, Warner JJ. Call to action: urgent challenges in
cardiovascular disease: a presidential advisory from the American Heart
Association. Circulation 2019;139:e44-e54.
2. Warner JJ, Crook HL, Whelan KM, Bleser WK, Roiland RA, Hamilton Lopez M,
Saunders RS, Wang TY, Hernandez AF, McClellan MB, Califf RM, Brown N; and the
American Heart Association Partnering with Regulators Learning Collaborative.
Improving cardiovascular drug and device development and evidence through
patient-centered research and clinical trials: a call to action from the value in healthcare initiative's partnering with regulators learning collaborative. Circ Cardiovasc Qual
Outcomes 2020;13:e006606.
3. Warden BA, Fazio S, Shapiro MD. The PCSK9 revolution: current status, controversies, and future directions. Trends Cardiovasc Med 2020;30:179-185.
4. Solomon SD, Zile M, Pieske B, Voors A, Shah A, Kraigher-Krainer E, Shi V,
Bransford T, Takeuchi M, Gong J, Lefkowitz M, Packer M, McMurray JJ;
Prospective comparison of ARNI with ARB on Management Of heart failUre with
preserved ejectioN fracTion (PARAMOUNT) Investigators. The angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor LCZ696 in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a phase 2 double-blind randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2012;
380:1387-1395.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/32/3039/6170956 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

the new drug (experimental arm), and a similar counterpart receives
the standard of care know to date (control arm). Many parameters can
be considered to evaluate the activity of the new drug. These parameters can vary widely depending on the field of investigation. In cardiovascular clinical trials, the integration of traditional endpoints (such as
death and hospitalizations) and patient-centred outcomes may capture
patients' most meaningful endpoints.
The next step, if the results from phase II trials are encouraging, is to
launch a more prominent study enrolling more patients, usually several
hundreds, to test the activity of the new drug, sometimes using different treatment schedules and/or administration routes. These are the
studies that FDA (USA), EMA (Europe), and other authorities use the
most to base their decision on whether the drug can be approved and
commercialized.
However, this is not a strict rule. There are examples of approved
drugs in earlier stages of clinical development due to their indisputable
efficacy, often in patients with very specific diseases. One example is
the rapid approval of LCZ696, a combination of the neprilysin inhibitor
sacubitril with the angiotensin-receptor blocker valsartan, currently indicated for treating patients with heart failure with reduced ejection
fraction.4 The in-depth understanding of the two inhibitors' pharmacology allowed to skip the phase II development program for LCZ696,
therefore proceeding directly from phase I to be approved for the use
in practice.
A parallel and complementary kind of research, called 'translational',
can be done when the new drug enters in the clinical setting. These
studies are based on analyses of tissue/blood from patients treated
with the new compound to identify potential drug resistance


