4103

CardioPulse

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab200

Inspired by a Nobel prizewinning father
Brothers Jonathan and David Katz reflect on the work and influence of their father
Bernard Katz, who was awarded the 1970 Nobel Prize-Mark Nicholls reports
Mark Nicholls*

Their memories are of a devoted father, and a scientist with high and
uncompromising intellectual standards. Yet along with the long hours
he worked, the travelling and lectures, brothers Jonathan and David
Katz also reflect on 1970 Nobel laureate Sir Bernard Katz as a man
with a sense of humour, a love of opera and a fine chess player.
Their childhood was one surrounded by science and renowned scientists; people such as their father's laboratory technician J.L.
Parkinson ('Uncle Parky'); Alan Hodgkin, Andrew Huxley, and Jack
Eccles-awarded the 1963 Nobel Prize for work on ion exchange and
nerve membrane excitation-and Stephen Kuffler, Ricardo Miledi,
Paul Fatt, and J.B.S. Haldane. Some were even visitors to the family
home in North West London.
While David perhaps had the greater appetite for the scientific
work, Jonathan remarked: 'I was aware, at an earlier age than most children, of the word "physiology", and roughly what it meant'.

Refugee scientists
Their godparents were A.V. Hill and his wife Margaret, who had offered Bernard and Marguerite Katz lodgings at one stage. David said
the reverence their father held for his mentor A.V. Hill was clear to
them from an early stage.
'We knew Dad considered "AV" not only to have been a great scientist, but also of towering importance in the campaign to welcome
refugee scientists from Germany before World War Two', he said.
'My understanding of what was then relatively recent European history
increased in parallel with any appreciation of the science he pursued'.
Bernard was born in Leipzig in 1911 of Russian-Jewish origin but left
Germany in February 1935 amid the dangers Hitler's Nazi regime was
posing to Jews and 'found England to be a place of refuge'. Having lost
his possessions, but survived, he was accepted as a PhD student by
Professor Hill at University College London (UCL).
He later said Hill-already a Nobel laureate having won the 1922
prize for Physiology or Medicine for his discovery relating to the production of heat in the muscle-was the 'decisive influence' on his
career.
It was in this environment that the two boys were raised.

Medicine and languages
David was born in July 1947 when his parents were still lodging with the
Hills but by the time Jonathan arrived in May 1950 the family had moved
into their own small semi-detached house. The boys went to a local
*Email: mark.nicholls@mnmedia.co.uk

preparatory school and then University College School in Hampstead
where David specialized in sciences and Jonathan in languages.
'By then, I had moved into a science stream at my school and it was almost certainly around this time that I began to know a little more about
what my father really did', said David. 'Any knowledge about my father's
work on nerve trunk and then on synaptic transmission emerged gradually amidst haphazard childhood recollections like these'.
The brothers were also used to being taken into University College
London at weekends when their father needed to keep an eye on the
progress of an experiment.
David began his medical studies at UCL in 1965 and studied for a
BSc in the Pharmacology Department and went on to become a family
doctor, retiring in 2006.
Jonathan, a lecturer in Classics at Oxford University, initially imaged
he too would follow a medical or scientific career, but by his early
teens he was learning French and Latin, was picking up Russian following his father's visit there in 1962, and later concentrated on Latin,
Greek, and Ancient History, as well as studying music.
'My intention was to take my undergraduate degree in Classics and
also pursue a career as a professional musician', he added. 'Things
turned out a bit differently, because while taking my Classics degree I
developed a new interest in South Asia, especially Sanskrit. I eventually
took my final degree in that subject too'.

Nobel honour
Meanwhile, their father's career flourished and having succeeded Hill
as Professor of Biophysics at UCL in 1952, Katz and his team worked
to unlock the mysteries of how messages are mediated between nerve
cells.
This led to the 1970 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for
Bernard Katz, awarded jointly with Ulf von Euler and Julius Axelrod, for
their discoveries concerning 'the humoral transmitters in the nerve terminals and the mechanisms for their storage, release and inactivation'.
The work, described by the Nobel committee as 'a fundamental
step in neurophysiology and neuropharmacology', is also acknowledged as paving the way for the development of cardiovascular drugs.
Bernard was in California when he was informed of the Nobel Prize,
but the brothers have vivid memories of that day.
'I was in my first undergraduate year at University, and the news was
brought to me by a fellow student who had heard it announced on the
radio', said Jonathan, who recalled his father commenting that he felt
numerous other scientists and colleagues also merited the award.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/40/4103/6211339 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

MNmedia, Norfolk, UK

4104

CardioPulse

Figure 2 Collage shows: Bernard Katz; and a family photograph (from left): Jonathan, Bernard, David, Kalyani and Marian Katz.

'And although the Nobel Prize is widely thought of as a pinnacle of public recognition, my father felt equally rewarded by the Copley Medal of
the Royal Society. But we were naturally all immensely proud and
delighted.'

David was a second-year postgraduate student in the Pharmacology
Department at UCL when Dr Ivor Gartside, a lecturer in the
Physiology Department, ran into the research unit with the news.
By this time, Jonathan's thoughts were far from a career in science
or medicine, while David-who remembers the ceremony in Sweden
as an 'extraordinary experience'-was well along his own path towards a career in medicine.

Relaxed moments
Later, the brothers recall more relaxed moments with their father.
'It was between school and University', said Jonathan, 'when I was
living for a time in Germany and saw him one evening in a reunion with
some pre-war friends, that I realised the true cultural base of his habits
of speech and his, often ironic, attitudes. The experience that evening
helped me to understand him more, and in some ways to engage with
him in a more equal way later in life'.
Bernard's experience of living in Nazi Germany had made him 'constantly aware of the dangerous forces arising from declining economic

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/40/4103/6211339 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 1 Bernard Katz playing chess with his grandson Joseph in 1993.

4105

CardioPulse

Love of opera and chess
Jonathan and his wife Kalyani, who is a doctor specializing in psychiatry,
have a son, Joseph, who works in corporate finance but would often
play chess with his grandfather, who died in April 2003, aged 92.
David and his wife Marian have two daughters, Judith, a teacher, and
Stephanie, a civil servant, and both remember their grandfather well.
He affectionately recalls walking in the Lake District with his father in
the 1960s, and also being introduced to opera and the works of Verdi
and Wagner.
'Resting properly from his scientific work, he could be companionable', he added. 'I remember listening with him to broadcasts on
Sunday afternoons of several Wagner operas. Dad would recline on
his bed with a few sets of his work papers nearby, cat on chest, as he
explained a few points during the intervals'.

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab317

Global Spotlights

The Hellenic Journal of Cardiology: a 64-year
voyage of discovery from the cradle of European
civilization to the world
Dimitris Tousoulis

1

*, Evangelos Oikonomou

1,2

, and John Kanakakis3

1
First Department of Cardiology, 'Hippokration' General Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, School of Medicine, Athens, Greece; 2Third Department
Clinic, Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Sotiria Hospital, Athens, Greece; and 3Department of Clinical Therapeutics, University of Athens,
Alexandra Hospital, Athens, Greece

Dimitris Tousoulis MD, PhD, of the Hippokration Hospital, in Athens,
Greece is current Editor-in-Chief of the Hellenic Journal of Cardiology
which has been publishing high-quality articles since 1957. The bimonthly publication serves as the official voice of the Hellenic Society
of Cardiology. It has an acceptance rate of 20% and features a mixture of reviews, original articles, editorials, and correspondence relating to all clinical and basic science aspects of cardiology. The
international edition was first published in 2002.
Former Editors-in-Chief Christodoulos Stefanadis MD, PhD, and
Panos Vardas MD, PhD, both took the Journal forward during their
tenure, and their efforts helped secure MEDLINE registration for the
international edition. The Journal was subsequently indexed by
PubMed and ScienceDirect, among others, and was also included in
Journal Citation ReportsTM (JCR) statistics.
When Tousoulis assumed the Editor-in-Chief role in 2015, he engaged the publisher Elsevier BV, aiming for a wholesale rejuvenation of
the Journal. He says: 'This included the review process, the publication
format and most importantly, the content and quality of published
articles.' (Figure 1) Since then, he says, the dynamic international

Journal continues to attract an ever-growing number of articles from
Europe, the USA, Canada, Asia, and all over the world in the form of
original research articles and reviews, alongside a significant number of
editorials and opinion papers from established and recognized scientists in cardiovascular medicine.
Since 2016, the Journal has achieved considerable growth in readership, with almost 43 000 downloads from the USA, 9000 from the UK,
and even 6000 from Japan. Articles from the Journal have also gained
considerable attention on social media platforms according to PlumX
Metrics. More significantly, Tousoulis says, this has led to a dramatic
rise in the Impact Factor (IF) of over 400%, from 1.0 in 2015, to
4.047 in 2019, based on Clarivate Analytics. According to Cite Score
Tracker, statistics for 2020 look potentially higher. The Hellenic Journal
of Cardiology has also risen from 107th position in 2015 to 39th position
in 2019 amongst cardiovascular journals.
As the mouthpiece of the Hellenic Society of Cardiology, the
Journal represents and reflects the activity of one of the most active
national societies in Europe, with 18 working groups, and two national
and four regional annual congresses serving >3300 members from

*Corresponding author. First Department of Cardiology, 'Hippokration' General Hospital, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, School of Medicine, Vasilissis Sofias
114, PO 11528, Athens, Greece. Tel: th30 213 2088099, Fax: th30 213 2088676, Email: drtousoulis@hotmail.com

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/40/4103/6211339 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

conditions', but Jonathan remembered how later he was 'very favourably impressed' by the young German students he met on his visits to
his former home country.
While there was pressure on both boys to achieve, neither felt that
was a result of Nobel Prize.
Jonathan, who continues to teach and writ about Latin, Greek,
and Sanskrit languages and also performs as a pianist and harpsichordist, said: 'My father's influence on me has been such that no
day passes without my wishing I could have asked his opinion
about some subject or other-political, historical, linguistic or so
many other things. The conciseness of expression, penetrating intellect, and above all perhaps ironic perceptiveness, are all things I
have appreciated more and more as his physical presence recedes
into the past'.


