4881

CardioPulse

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab326

Global Spotlights

Emma Louise Robinson
Yvan Devaux 4

1

*, Costanza Emanueli

2

, Fabio Martelli

3

, and

1
Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 12700 E 19th Ave, Aurora, CO, 80045, USA; 2National Heart & Lung
Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, ICTEM Building, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK; 3Molecular Cardiology Laboratory, IRCCS Policlinico San
Donato, San Donato Milanese, Milan 20097, Italy; and 4Cardiovascular Research Unit, Department of Population Health, Luxembourg Institute of Health, L-1445 Strassen,
Luxembourg

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) remains the biggest killer globally,
driven in part by the ageing population andlack of recent advances in
diagnostic and prognostic tools and effective tailored treatment
options. The World Heart Federation has estimated that by 2030, the
global financial burden of CVD will exceed 1 trillion USD.1
The EU-CardioRNA Cooperation in Science and Technology
(COST) Action (www.cardiorna.eu) was launched in October 2018
and included 21 founding members representing 14 European countries. Today, our network stands at 192 members from 32 European
countries and 9 international partner countries spanning across all
continents.
The goal of the EU-CardioRNA COST Action is to delve into
the underlying causes of CVD by understanding transcriptomics
changes in the cardiovascular system, to evaluate manipulation of
RNA as novel therapeutic strategies and to identify RNA-based
biomarkers for CVD.2 Preparation of technical guidelines and recommendations for RNA-related work to enhance research findings
reproducibility, robustness, and translatability is a key endeavour
of the Action. EU-CardioRNA is composed of four core working
groups, as previously described.2 Now, more than midway through
the project, a number of key outputs, including exchange of scientific staff and expertise and publication of position papers on regulatory RNAs, a state-of-the-art on dissection of the cardiovascular
transcriptome and RNA markers, and artificial intelligence to predict cardiovascular outcomes post-COVID-19, have been achieved
(Figure 1).3-5
Several international groups, including EU-CardioRNA members,
have supported the understanding that epigenetic, transcriptomics,
epi-transcriptomic, and post-transcriptomic changes drive CVD, by
dysregulating the expression of both cardioprotective and pathogenic
genes. Our community has also contributed to the global effort to reveal cellular sub-types carrying distinct gene expression or chromatin
profiles in the healthy and disease CV system. Through the use of single-cell sequencing technologies, we are now starting to understand
how cell type-specific molecular remodelling contributes to disease,

*Corresponding author. Tel: th1 303 724 0060, Email: emma.2.robinson@cuanschutz.edu

with strategies such as adeno-associated virus and nanoparticle technology attempting to cell-type selectively manipulate RNAs in vivo in
preclinical models.
The recent demonstration of the value of studying RNAs to find
new CVD drugs has opened the door to a new reservoir of cardiovascular drugs, i.e. non-coding RNAs. Indeed, a synthetic oligonucleotide
inhibitor of miR-132, a microRNA promoting pathological hypertrophy, has proven successful and safe in a Phase 1b trial (NCT04045405)
to protect against ischaemic heart failure.6 This is an excellent example
of how fundamental understanding of non-coding RNA biology in the
CV system, the focus of EU-CardioRNA Working Group 1, can progress within a decade to patient care. Translational research is key and
based on partnerships between academia, hospitals, and industry,
three arms constituting the foundations of the EU-CardioRNA COST
Action.
RNAs produced by the cardiovascular system, or other disease-affected organs, may be released extracellularly and circulate in the
bloodstream conjugated to proteins, lipoproteins, or as part of extracellular vesicles, such as exosomes and microvesicles. These carriers
prevent RNA degradation, significantly increasing the potential of RNA
to be developed into circulating biomarkers. The field of biomarker research to identify highly sensitive and specific indicators of disease
presence and severity is ever-expanding with the accessibility to next
generation sequencing and screening. One theme emerging in the field
is that an RNA or transcriptomic signature or combination of markers
along with clinical parameters may prove more effective for diagnosis
of CV disease sub-types than the use of individual biomarker. This is
exemplified by a collaborative work from EU-CardioRNA members
from KU Leuven and Luxembourg Institute of Health, allowing the
identification of circulating RNAs QSOX1 and PLBD1 as novel independent markers of left ventricular dysfunction following acute myocardial
infarction. These candidate new RNA biomarkers were the result of
whole blood RNA profiling from an initial discovery cohort of 143
patients with acute myocardial infarction, which were later externally
validated in a cohort of 449 patients.7

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/48/4881/6295708 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Leveraging non-coding RNAs to fight
cardiovascular disease: the EU-CardioRNA
network

4882

CardioPulse

Following its kick-off meeting in Brussels in October 2018, the EUCardioRNA COST Action has so far played host to three in-person
working group meetings in Portugal, Turkey, and the Netherlands. The
4th Working Group meeting held in Maastricht, the Netherlands,
played host to 85 speakers and attendees from 33 different countries,
including Estonia, Slovakia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Malta, Russia, and
Singapore. Two themes of the meeting were 'Cardiac aging and associated comorbidities' and 'Novel alternative approaches to studying
CVD', with scientific sessions as well as roundtable discussions were
tailored around these topics.7
Outputs from meeting roundtable discussions and collaborations
within the EU-CardioRNA COST Action include grant applications,
position papers, and special issues in peer-reviewed journals including
'RNAs in Brain and Heart Diseases' in the International Journal of
Molecular Sciences and 'Genetic and Gene Regulation underlying Sex
Differences in Cardiovascular Disease' in Frontiers in Cardiovascular
Medicine.8,9
An important goal of COST Actions is the training and nurturing
early career scientists (ECIs, within 8 years of PhD completion or
equivalent) in the field. EU-CardioRNA has thus far funded 11 ECIs in
short-term scientific missions (STSM) to visit another laboratory
within the network for up to 3 months. One EU-CardioRNA STSM
award has resulted in a subsequent successful Marie Sklodowska-

Curie Individual fellowship with the host laboratory. Furthermore, a
hybrid training school is planned for September 2021 at Roskilde
University, Denmark (Figure 1).
When the COVID-19 pandemic hit Europe in spring 2020, many research laboratories were shut down, or reduced to very essential
work only, for several months. Face-to-face meetings and travel were
of course cancelled.
Our science communication team (Working Group 4) rapidly
launched a CardioRNA group instant messaging for fast and informal
interaction between members to share not only latest scientific discoveries, ideas, and technical questions and, especially, to use camaraderie
as the instrument of mental health support. This allowed EUCardioRNA members from all around the world, from Brazil to North
America, Europe, Russia, or Singapore, to remain connected and discuss how different laboratories, institutes, and countries were reacting
to the pandemic. We held the first EU-CardioRNA live virtual meeting,
CardioRNA LIVE! in September 2020, which included 120 speakers
and attendees over 4 days of talks and discussion, representing 34
countries including New Zealand, Brazil, South Africa, Armenia,
and Russia (Figure 2). The sequel virtual meeting, CardioRNA
LIVE!Reboot, will be held in July of 2021 (https://cardiorna.eu/news/
cardiorna-live-reboot-virtual-meeting-5-7th-july-2021/, date accessed
26 May 2021).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/48/4881/6295708 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 1 Key outputs and deliverables from the EU-CardioRNA COST Action working groups.

4883

CardioPulse

and important gaps in biomedicine. We look forward to further
expanding our network, both globally and interdisciplinary, and working together to combat unmet needs in cardiovascular disease.
Twitter: @cost17129
YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v 1/4 oDe4Wl5opN8, date
accessed 26 May 2021.
Website: https://cardiorna.eu/, date accessed 26 May 2021.
Conflict of interest: none declared.

Figure 2 Official flyer advertisement for CardioRNA LIVE! Virtual
meeting, 7-10 September 2020.

Moreover, with an interdisciplinary network comprised of clinical
and translational researchers as well as experts in artificial intelligence
and machinelearning in the cardiovascular field, we were in an optimal
position to launch a call to action for the CV side of COVID-19 as well
as multicentre and multidisciplinary research projects to understand
CV risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection.10 SARS-CoV-2 CVD as a secondaryconsequence of SARS-CoV-2 infection is predicted to escalate the already severe socio-economic burden of CVD throughout the world.
Coordinated from the Luxemburg Institute of Health and lead by
EU-CardioRNA Chair Yvan Devaux, a team of researchers, clinicians,
experts in artificial intelligence, and industrials from 15 partners institutions from 12 European countries successfully acquired close to 4 million EUROs from the European Commission for the 2-year Fast Track
COVIRNA project (SC1-PHE-CORONAVIRUS-2B call; Grant ID:
101016072). In the COVIRNA project (www.covirna.eu, date
accessed 26 May 2021), a probe-optimized FiMICs set of 3233 cardiacenriched lncRNAs detectable in peripheral blood is being examined
for its ability to predict cardiovascular outcomes following COVID-19
infection. Moreover, one basic science work package aims to explore
the mechanisms underlying COVID-19 cardiometabolic complications,
in search for new molecular targets.
More than ever, these recent unprecedented and exceptional times
have demonstrated the importance and possibility of connectivity between researchers globally for support, as well as the capacity of large
research networks to rapidly join forces to actively tackle very relevant

1. Timmis A, Townsend N, Gale CP, Torbica A, Lettino M, Petersen SE, Mossialos
EA, Maggioni AP, Kazakiewicz D, May HT, De Smedt D, Flather M, Zuhlke L,
Beltrame JF, Huculeci R, Tavazzi L, Hindricks G, Bax J, Casadei B, Achenbach S,
Wright L, Vardas P, Mimoza L, Artan G, Aurel D, Chettibi M, Hammoudi N,
Sisakian H, Pepoyan S, Metzler B, Siostrzonek P, Weidinger F, Jahangirov T, Aliyev
F, Rustamova Y, Manak N, Mrochak A, Lancellotti P, Pasquet A, Claeys M,
Kusljugic Z, Dizdarevic Hudic L, Smajic E, Tokmakova MP, Gatzov PM, Milicic D,
Bergovec M, Christou C, Moustra HH, Christodoulides T, Linhart A, Taborsky M,
Hansen HS, Holmvang L, Kristensen SD, Abdelhamid M, Shokry K, Kampus P,
Viigimaa M, Ryodi E, NiemelEURa M, Rissanen TT, Le Heuzey J-Y, Gilard M, Aladashvili
A, Gamkrelidze A, Kereselidze M, Zeiher A, Katus H, Bestehorn K, Tsioufis C,
Goudevenos J, Csanadi Z, Becker D, T
oth K, J
ona Hrafnkelsd
ottir Th, Crowley J,
Kearney P, Dalton B, Zahger D, Wolak A, Gabrielli D, Indolfi C, Urbinati S,
Imantayeva G, Berkinbayev S, Bajraktari G, Ahmeti A, Berisha G, Erkin M, Saamay
A, Erglis A, Bajare I, Jegere S, Mohammed M, Sarkis A, Saadeh G, Zvirblyte R,
Sakalyte G, Slapikas R, Ellafi K, El Ghamari F, Banu C, Beissel J, Felice T, Buttigieg
SC, Xuereb RG, Popovici M, Boskovic A, Rabrenovic M, Ztot S, Abir-Khalil S, van
Rossum AC, Mulder BJM, Elsendoorn MW, Srbinovska-Kostovska E, Kostov J,
Marjan B, Steigen T, Mjolstad OC, Ponikowski P, Witkowski A, Jankowski P, Gil
VM, Mimoso J, Baptista S, Vinereanu D, Chioncel O, Popescu BA, Shlyakhto E,
Oganov R, Foscoli M, Zavatta M, Dikic AD, Beleslin B, Radovanovic MR, Hlivak P,
 Mu~
Hatala R, Kaliska G, Kenda M, Fras Z, Anguita M, Cequier A,
niz J, James S,
Johansson B, Platonov P, Zellweger MJ, Pedrazzini GB, Carballo D, Shebli HE,
Kabbani S, Abid L, Addad F, Bozkurt E, Kayikcioglu M, Erol MK, Kovalenko V,
Nesukay E, Wragg A, Ludman P, Ray S, Kurbanov R, Boateng D, Daval G, de
Benito Rubio V, Sebastiao D, de Courtelary PT, Bardinet I; European Society of
Cardiology. Cardiovascular disease statistics 2019. Eur Heart J 2020;41:12-85.
2. Badimon L, Devaux Y. Transcriptomics research to improve cardiovascular healthcare. Eur Heart J 2020;41:3296-3298.
3. Badimon L, Robinson EL, Jusic A, Carpusca I, deWindt LJ, Emanueli C, Ferdinandy P,
Gu W, Gyongyosi M, Hackl M, Karaduzovic-Hadziabdic K, Lustrek M, Martelli F,
Nham E, Potocnjak I, Satagopam V, Schneider R, Thum T, Devaux Y; on behalf of
EU-CardioRNA COST Action CA17129.Cardiovascular RNA markers and artificial
intelligence may improve Covid-19 outcome: position paper from the EUCardioRNA COST Action CA17129. Cardiovasc Res 2021. doi:10.1093/cvr/cvab094.
4. Gomes CPC, Schroen B, Kuster GM, Robinson EL, Ford K, Squire IB, Heymans S,
Martelli F, Emanueli C, Devaux Y; EU-CardioRNA COST Action (CA17129).
Regulatory RNAs in heart failure. Circulation 2020;141:313-328.
5. Robinson EL, Baker AH, Brittan M, McCracken I, Condorelli G, Emanueli C,
Srivastava KP, Gaetano C, Thum T, Vanhaverbeke M, Angione C, Heymans S,
Devaux Y, Pedrazzini T, Martelli F. Dissecting the transcriptome in cardiovascular
disease. Cardiovasc Res 2021. doi:10.1093/cvr/cvab117.
6. TEURaubel J, Hauke W, Rump S, Viereck J, Batkai S, Poetzsch J, Rode L, Weigt H,
Genschel C, Lorch U, Theek C, Levin AA, Bauersachs J, Solomon SD, Thum T.
Novel antisense therapy targeting microRNA-132 in patients with heart failure:
results of a first-in-human Phase 1b randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study. Eur Heart J 2021;42:178-188.
7. Vanhaverbeke M, Vausort M, Veltman D, Zhang L, Wu M, Laenen G, Gillijns
H, Moreau Y, Bartunek J, Van De Werf F, Devaux Y, Janssens S, Sinnaeve PR;
EU-CardioRNA COST Action CA17129. Peripheral blood RNA levels of
QSOX1 and PLBD1 are new independent predictors of left ventricular
dysfunction after acute myocardial infarction. Circ Genom Precis Med
2019;12:e002656.
8. Beis D, Zerr I, Martelli F, Doehner W, Devaux Y. RNAs in brain and heart diseases. Int J Mol Sci 2020;21:3717.
9. Jusic A, Salgado Somoza A., Paes A.B., Stefanizzi F.M., N
uria Martinez-Alarc
on N.,
FPinet F., Martelli F., Devaux Y., Robinson E.L., Novella S. Approaching sex differences in cardiovascular non-coding RNA research. Int J Mol Sci 2020;21: 4890.
10. Emanueli C, Badimon L, Martelli F, Potocnjak I, Carpusca I, Robinson EL, Devaux
Y. Call to action for the cardiovascular side of COVID-19. Eur Heart J
2020;41:1796-1797.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/48/4881/6295708 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

References


