ISSUE @ A GLANCE

European Heart Journal (2022) 43, 435-439
https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehac014

Filippo Crea1,2
1
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, Rome, Italy; and 2Department of
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Sciences, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy

With thanks to Amelia Meier-Batschelet, Johanna Hugger, and Martin Meyer for help with compilation of this article.

For the podcast associated with this article, please visit https://academic.
oup.com/eurheartj/pages/Podcasts.
This Focus Issue on vascular biology and medicine contains the
State of the Art Review article 'Vascular repair and regeneration in cardiometabolic diseases' authored by David Hess
from the University of Toronto in Canada, and colleagues.1 The
authors present current strategies to assess the progression of
provascular regenerative cell depletion in peripheral blood samples of individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) and obesity,
and summarize novel clinical data showing that intervention using
sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibition or gastric bypass surgery can efficiently restore cell-mediated vascular repair mechanisms associated with profound cardiovascular benefits in recent
outcome trials. Collectively, this thesis generates a compelling argument for early intervention using current pharmacological
agents to prevent or restore imbalanced circulating progenitor
content and maintain vascular regenerative cell trafficking to sites
of ischaemic damage. This conceptual advancement may lead to
the design of novel therapeutic approaches to prevent or reverse
the devastating cardiovascular comorbidities currently associated
with T2D and obesity.
Stroke is a leading cause of death and disability worldwide.2-8
Women are disproportionately affected by stroke, exhibiting higher mortality and disability rates post-stroke than men. In a second
State of the Art Review article entitled 'Importance of sex and
gender in ischaemic stroke and carotid atherosclerotic
disease', Karina Gasbarrino from McGill University in Montreal,
Canada, and colleagues note that clinical stroke research has historically included mostly men, and studies were not properly designed to perform sex- and gender-based analyses, leading to
underappreciation of differences between men and women in
stroke presentation, outcomes, and response to treatment.9
Reasons for these differences are probably multifactorial; some

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European Society of Cardiology 2022

are due to gender-related factors (i.e. decreased social support
or lack of stroke awareness), yet others result from biological differences between sexes. Unlike men, women often present with
'atypical' stroke symptoms. Lack of awareness of 'atypical' presentation has led to delays in hospital arrival, diagnosis, and treatment
of women. Differences also extend to carotid atherosclerotic disease, a cause of stroke, where plaques isolated from women are
undeniably different in morphology/composition compared with
men. As a result, women may require different treatment from
men, as evidenced by the fact that they derive less benefit from carotid revascularization than men but benefit more from medical
management. Despite this, women are less likely than men to receive medical therapy for cardiovascular risk factor management.
This review focuses on the importance of sex and gender in ischaemic stroke and carotid atherosclerotic disease, summarizing the
current evidence with respect to (i) stroke incidence, mortality,
awareness, and outcomes; (ii) carotid plaque prevalence, morphology and composition, and gene connectivity; (iii) the role of sex
hormones and sex chromosomes in atherosclerosis and ischaemic
stroke risk; and (iv) carotid disease management.
Evidence suggests that overactivation of the mineralocorticoid
receptor (MR) leads to inflammation and fibrosis in the heart, kidneys, and vasculature where the MR is extensively expressed, that
can drive chronic kidney disease (CKD) and cardiovascular disease
(CVD) progression.10 Finerenone is a novel, selective, nonsteroidal MR antagonist (MRA) that blocks MR-mediated sodium
reabsorption and MR overactivation, and has demonstrated antiinflammatory and antifibrotic effects in pre-clinical kidney disease
and CVD models. In a Fast Track Clinical Research article entitled
'Cardiovascular and kidney outcomes with finerenone in
patients with type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease:
the FIDELITY pooled analysis', Rajiv Agarwal from the
Indiana University School of Medicine and Richard Roudebush
VA Medical Center in Indianapolis, USA, and colleagues indicate

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/6/435/6526344 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

New therapeutic targets in the
prevention of atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease

436

Issue @ a Glance

that the purpose of the FIDELITY analysis was to perform an individual patient-level pre-specified pooled efficacy and safety analysis across a broad spectrum of CKD to provide more robust
estimates of safety and efficacy of finerenone compared with placebo.11 For this pre-specified analysis, two phase III, multicentre,
double-blind trials (FIDELIO-DKD and FIGARO-DKD) involving
patients with CKD and T2D, randomized 1:1 to finerenone or placebo, were combined. Main time-to-event efficacy outcomes were
a composite of cardiovascular death, non-fatal myocardial infarction, non-fatal stroke, or hospitalization for heart failure, and a

composite of kidney failure, a sustained >=57% decrease in estimated glomerular filtration rate from baseline over >=4 weeks,
or renal death. Among 13 026 patients with a median follow-up
of 3.0 years, the composite cardiovascular outcome occurred in
825 (12.7%) patients receiving finerenone and in 939 (14.4%) receiving placebo [hazard ratio (HR) 0.86; P = 0.0018]. The composite kidney outcome occurred in 360 (5.5%) patients receiving
finerenone and in 465 (7.1%) receiving placebo (HR 0.77; P =
0.0002). Overall safety outcomes were generally similar between
treatment arms. Hyperkalaemia leading to permanent treatment

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/6/435/6526344 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 1 Time to efficacy outcomes. (A) The composite cardiovascular outcome defined as cardiovascular death, non-fatal myocardial infarction, non-fatal stroke, or hospitalization for heart failure (Aalen-Johansen curve). (B) The composite kidney outcome defined as kidney failure,
sustained >=57% decrease in estimated glomerular filtration rate from baseline over >=4 weeks, or renal death (Aalen-Johansen curve). (C ) The
composite kidney outcome defined as kidney failure, sustained >=40% decrease in estimated glomerular filtration rate from baseline over >=4
weeks, or renal death (Aalen-Johansen curve). (D) All-cause mortality (Kaplan-Meier curve). Outcomes were assessed in time-to-event
analyses.11

Issue @ a Glance

437

discontinuation occurred more frequently in patients receiving finerenone (1.7%) than in those receiving placebo (0.6%).
The authors conclude that finerenone reduces the risk of clinically important cardiovascular and kidney outcomes vs. placebo
across the spectrum of CKD in patients with T2D. The contribution is accompanied by an Editorial by Pardeep Jhund and Carly
Adamson from the University of Glasgow in Scotland, UK.12
They highlight that there is one important finding for the cardiologist from FIDELITY: it offers insight into which patients may benefit
from finerenone in the future. In an analysis of the components of

the cardiovascular outcomes, the biggest relative risk reduction
(22%) was in hospitalizations for heart failure. Heart failure has suffered from issues of artificial cut-offs for ejection fraction which
have only recently begun to be disentangled by guidelines. While
MRAs hold a class 1A recommendation for the treatment of heart
failure with reduced ejection fraction, trials of MRAs in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction have not been so conclusive.
Finerenone is being tested in the FINEARTS-HF trial
(NCT04435626) in a population with heart failure with preserved
ejection fraction (>=40%) to determine if this non-steroidal MRA

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/6/435/6526344 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 2 The study demonstrates that platelet-derived MMP-2 plays a pivotal role in the very early phases of atherogenesis in hypercholesterolaemic mice. Circulating activated platelets expressing MMP-2 on their surface interact with PAR-1 of endothelial cells, triggering signal
transduction and activation with the consequent exposure of adhesion molecules (i.e. VCAM-1), the latter in turn facilitate the adhesion
and transmigration of monocytes through the endothelial monolayer ultimately leading to atheroma formation. The interaction between
MMP-2 expressed by activated platelets and endothelial cell PAR-1 may represent a novel therapeutic target for the prevention of
atherosclerosis.18

438

photochemical-induced arterial damage and atherosclerotic lesions in the aorta, measured by the en face method, after 4 months
of atherogenic diet as compared with LDLR-/- mice. Moreover,
repeated transfusions of autologous-activated platelets in
LDLR-/- mice on an atherogenic diet significantly enhanced the
extension of aortic atherosclerotic lesions while transfusion of activated platelets from MMP-2-/- mice did not. In vitro coincubation studies showed that platelet-derived MMP-2 plays a pivotal role in the development and progression of atherosclerosis
through a complex cross-talk between activated platelets, monocyte/macrophages, and endothelial cells. Translational studies in
patients with coronary artery disease and chronic HIV infection
showed that platelet surface expression of MMP-2 highly significantly correlated with the degree of carotid artery stenosis.
The authors conclude that they demonstrate a previously unknown mechanism of the pathway through which platelets expressing MMP-2 trigger the initial phases of atherosclerosis and provide
a mechanism showing that they activate endothelial PAR-1, triggering endothelial p38MAPK signalling and the expression of adhesion molecules. Thus, the development of drugs selectively
blocking platelet MMP-2 or its expression may represent a new approach to the prevention of atherosclerosis. This contribution is
accompanied by an Editorial by Judith Cosemans from
Maastricht University in the Netherlands.19 Cosemans concludes
that making use of the diversity in signalling downstream of
PAR-1 upon its activation by MMP-1 and -2 vs. thrombin may provide a promising avenue to selectively target the proinflammatory
activity of PAR-1.
Atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ACVD) is a major cause
of mortality and morbidity worldwide, and increased LDLs play a
critical role in development and progression of atherosclerosis.20-23 In a Translational Research article entitled
'Propionate attenuates atherosclerosis by immunedependent regulation of intestinal cholesterol metabolism', Arash Haghikia from the Charit'e-Universit"atsmedizin
Berlin in Germany, and colleagues examined for the first time
gut immunomodulatory effects of the microbiota-derived metabolite propionic acid (PA) on intestinal cholesterol metabolism.24 In
apolipoprotein E-/- (Apoe-/-) mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD), PA
reduced intestinal cholesterol absorption and aortic atherosclerotic lesion area. Further, PA increased regulatory T-cell numbers
and interleukin (IL)-10 levels in the intestinal microenvironment,
which in turn suppressed the expression of Niemann-Pick
C1-like 1 (Npc1l1), a major intestinal cholesterol transporter.
Blockade of IL-10 receptor signalling attenuated the PA-related reduction in total and LDL cholesterol and augmented atherosclerotic lesion severity. To translate these pre-clinical findings to
humans, the authors conducted a randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled
human
study
(clinical
trial
no.
NCT03590496). Oral supplementation with 500 mg of PA twice
daily over the course of 8 weeks significantly reduced LDL
(-15.9 vs. -1.6 mg/dL, P = 0.016), and non-HDL cholesterol levels (-18.9 vs. -0.6 mg/dL, P = 0.002) in subjects with elevated
baseline LDL cholesterol levels.
Haghikia et al. conclude that their findings reveal a novel
immune-mediated pathway linking the gut microbiota-derived metabolite PA with intestinal Npc1l1 expression and cholesterol

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/6/435/6526344 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

can improve outcomes in the spectrum of ejection fraction not
covered by current guideline recommendations for MRAs. The
authors conclude that we should continue to define diseases,
and risk, by cut-offs in a measure of renal or cardiac function until
trial design advances to accommodate the blurry nature of these
definitions. Until then, FIDELITY serves as yet another reminder
that combining populations will continue to yield important insights into the efficacy of treatments in wider populations.
Endothelial dysfunction plays an important role in CVDs.13 In a
Translational Research article entitled 'Tubulin-folding cofactor E deficiency promotes vascular dysfunction by increased endoplasmic reticulum stress', Panagiotis Efentakis
from the University Medical Center Mainz in Germany, and colleagues aimed to evaluate novel markers of flow-mediated dilation
(FMD) at the population level.14 In order to identify novel targets
that were negatively correlated with FMD and investigate their
contribution to vascular function, the authors performed a
genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 4175 participants of
the population-based Gutenberg Health Study. Subsequently, conditional knockout mouse models deleting the gene of interest
were generated and characterized. GWAS analysis revealed that
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the tubulin-folding cofactor E (TBCE) gene were negatively correlated with endothelial
function and TBCE expression. Vascular smooth muscle cell
(VSMC)-targeted TBCE deficiency was associated with endothelial
dysfunction, aortic wall hypertrophy, and endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress-mediated VSMC hyperproliferation in mice, paralleled
by calnexin up-regulation and exacerbated by the blood pressure
hormone angiotensin II. Treating SMMHC-ERT2-Cre+/-TBCEfl/fl
mice with the ER stress modulator tauroursodeoxycholic acid
(TUDCA) amplified Raptor/Beclin-1-dependent autophagy and
reversed vascular dysfunction.
Efentakis and colleagues conclude that TBCE and tubulin
homeostasis seem to be novel predictors of vascular function
and offer a new drug target to ameliorate ER stress-dependent
vascular dysfunction. This manuscript is accompanied by an
Editorial by Tohru Minamino and Hiroshi Iwata from the
Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine in Tokyo,
Japan.15 They conclude that precision medicine with TBCE genotyping would be desirable to examine the individual effects of
treatment of these ER stress-related diseases, including CVD. It
would also be of interest to examine whether TBCE genotypes
contribute to the residual CVD risk after lowering LDL cholesterol
and explore the potential of the additional treatment with
TUDCA for atherosclerotic diseases.
Platelets participate in CVD with mechanisms not yet fully clarified.16,17 Vascular wall matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) is involved in the arterial remodelling accompanying atherosclerosis.
In a Translational Research article entitled 'Matrix
metalloproteinase-2 on activated platelets triggers endothelial PAR-1 initiating atherosclerosis', Stefania Momi from
the University of Perugia in Italy, and colleagues point out that platelets contain and release MMP-2 but no information is available
on its role in atherosclerotic lesion formation.18 The authors generated double knockout mice lacking the LDL receptor (LDLR)
and MMP-2 only in circulating blood cells, showing that they develop significantly less femoral intima thickening after

Issue @ a Glance

Issue @ a Glance

References
1. Hess DA, Verma S, Bhatt D, Bakbak E, Terenzi DC, Puar P,, et al. Vascular repair
and regeneration in cardiometabolic diseases. Eur Heart J 2022;43:450-459.
2. Wegener S. Triggers of stroke: anger, emotional upset, and heavy physical exertion. New insights from the INTERSTROKE study. Eur Heart J 2022;43:210-212.
3. Smyth A, O'Donnell M, Hankey GJ, Rangarajan S, Lopez-Jaramillo P, Xavier D,,
et al. Anger or emotional upset and heavy physical exertion as triggers of stroke:
the INTERSTROKE study. Eur Heart J 2022;43:202-209.
4. Russo AM. Alcohol intake and risk of stroke in atrial fibrillation: the lesser the better, but this is not enough. Eur Heart J 2021;42:4769-4771.
5. Petersen JK, Haider Butt J, Yafasova A, Torp-Pedersen C, Sorensen R, Kruuse C,,
et al. Incidence of ischaemic stroke and mortality in patients with acute coronary
syndrome and first-time detected atrial fibrillation: a nationwide study. Eur Heart J
2021;42:4553-4561.
6. Steffel J, Eikelboom JW. Stroke prevention in AF: of Asians and non-Asians. Eur
Heart J 2019;40:1528-1530.
7. Tong TYN, Appleby PN, Key TJ, Dahm CC, Overvad K, Olsen A,, et al. The associations of major foods and fibre with risks of ischaemic and haemorrhagic stroke:
a prospective study of 418 329 participants in the EPIC cohort across nine
European countries. Eur Heart J 2020;41:2632-2640.
8. Mehra MR, Vaduganathan M, Fu M, Ferreira JP, Anker SD, Cleland JGF,, et al. A
comprehensive analysis of the effects of rivaroxaban on stroke or transient
ischaemic attack in patients with heart failure, coronary artery disease, and sinus
rhythm: the COMMANDER HF trial. Eur Heart J 2019;40:3593-3602.
9. Gasbarrino K, Di Iorio D, Daskalopoulou SS. Importance of sex and gender in
ischaemic stroke and carotid atherosclerotic disease. Eur Heart J 2022;43:
460-473.

10. Pitt B, Ferreira JP, Zannad F. Why are mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists the
Cinderella in evidence-based treatment of myocardial infarction complicated with
heart failure? Lessons from PARADISE-MI. Eur Heart J 2022;43:ehab717.
11. Agarwal R, Filippatos G, Pitt B, Anker SD, Rossing P, Joseph A,, et al.
Cardiovascular and kidney outcomes with finerenone in patients with type 2 diabetes and chronic kidney disease: the FIDELITY pooled analysis. Eur Heart J 2022;
43:474-484.
12. Adamson C, Jhund PS. Bringing FIDELITY to the estimate of treatment effects of
finerenone in chronic kidney disease due to type 2 diabetes. Eur Heart J 2022;43:
485-487.
13. Sara JDS, Lerman LO, Lerman A. The endothelium is a key player in the vascular
response to acute mental stress. Eur Heart J 2021;42:4089-4091.
14. Efentakis P, Molitor M, Kossmann S, Bochenek ML, Wild J, Lagrange J,, et al.
Tubulin-folding cofactor E deficiency promotes vascular dysfunction by increased
endoplasmic reticulum stress. Eur Heart J 2022;43:488-500.
15. Iwata H, Minamino T. Identification of a novel therapeutic target in vascular dysfunction: a showcase of reverse and forward translational research linking bench
to bedside. Eur Heart J 2022;43:501-503.
16. Sakamoto A, Guo L, Virmani R, Finn AV. Is there a role for activated platelets in
progression of aortic valve calcification? Eur Heart J 2019;40:1374-1377.
17. Bouchareb R, Boulanger MC, Tastet L, Mkannez G, Nsaibia MJ, Hadji F,, et al.
Activated platelets promote an osteogenic programme and the progression of
calcific aortic valve stenosis. Eur Heart J 2019;40:1362-1373.
18. Momi S, Falcinelli E, Petito E, Ciarrocca Taranta G, Ossoli A, Gresele P. Matrix
metalloproteinase-2 on activated platelets triggers endothelial PAR-1 initiating
atherosclerosis. Eur Heart J 2022;43:504-514.
19. Cosemans J. Platelet-derived MMP-2 in the prevention of plaque formation: how
many strokes is par? Eur Heart J 2022;43:515-517.
20. Schubert J, Lindahl B, Melhus H, Renlund H, Leosdottir M, Yari A,, et al.
Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol reduction and statin intensity in myocardial
infarction patients and major adverse outcomes: a Swedish nationwide cohort
study. Eur Heart J 2021;42:243-252.
21. Jang HD, Lee SE, Yang J, Lee HC, Shin D, Lee H,, et al. Cyclase-associated protein
1 is a binding partner of proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type-9 and is required for the degradation of low-density lipoprotein receptors by proprotein
convertase subtilisin/kexin type-9. Eur Heart J 2020;41:239-252.
22. Stiekema LCA, Stroes ESG, Verweij SL, Kassahun H, Chen L, Wasserman SM,,
et al. Persistent arterial wall inflammation in patients with elevated lipoprotein(a)
despite strong low-density lipoprotein cholesterol reduction by proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 antibody treatment. Eur Heart J 2019;40:
2775-2781.
23. Paciullo F, Gresele P. Effect of statins on measures of coagulation: potential role of
low-density lipoprotein receptors. Eur Heart J 2019;4:392.
24. Haghikia A, Zimmermann F, Schumann P, Jasina A, Roessler J, Schmidt D,, et al.
Propionate attenuates atherosclerosis by immune-dependent regulation of intestinal cholesterol metabolism. Eur Heart J 2022;43:518-533.
25. Osto E. The promise of the gut metabolite propionate for a novel and personalized lipid-lowering treatment. Eur Heart J 2022;43:534-537.
26. Spence JD, M"uller LO, Blanco PJ. How to identify which patients should not have a
systolic blood pressure target of &lt;120 mmHg. Eur Heart J 2022;43:538-539.
27. Messerli FH, Bavishi C, Messerli AW, Siontis GCM. On cerebrotoxicity of antihypertensive therapy and risk factor cosmetics. Eur Heart J 2021;42:758-760.
28. Messerli FH, Siontis GCM, Bavishi C, Messerli AW. Importance of pulse pressure
at low systolic blood pressure. Eur Heart J 2022;43:540.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/6/435/6526344 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

homeostasis. The results highlight the gut immune system as a potential therapeutic target to control dyslipidaemia that may introduce a new avenue for prevention of ACVDs. The manuscript is
accompanied by an Editorial by Elena Osto from the University
and University Hospital Zurich in Switzerland, and colleagues.25
Osto concludes that to prove beyond doubt whether and how
changes in the gut microbiota are causally associated with CVD,
are influenced by CVD, or are simple bystanders represents the
most difficult challenge to be faced within the next decade to
make sure that the microbiome might become an integral part
of clinical cardiovascular medicine.
The issue is also complemented by two Discussion Forum contributions. In a commentary entitled 'How to identify which patients should not have a systolic blood pressure target of
,120 mmHg', J. David Spence from Western University,
London, Ontario, Canada, and colleagues comment on the recent
publication 'On cerebrotoxicity of antihypertensive therapy
and risk factor cosmetics' by Franz H. Messerli from the
University of Bern in Switzerland.26,27 Messerli et al. respond in a
separate comment.28
The editors hope that readers of this issue of the European Heart
Journal will find it of interest.

439


