4007

CardioPulse

1937 recalls her first kiss with Leonard after seeing the performance together.
'For the rest of her life, she must have thought about that date with
Leonard whenever she saw Madame Butterfly', he pondered.

Inspiring young scientists
Trudy Elion-who received the National Medal of Science from
President George H. W. Bush, on 16 September 1991-will be remembered for medicines she developed and the scientific approach
that produced those drugs which led to the Nobel Prize.
'I think she would want to be remembered as someone who helped
to save lives', he added, 'who inspired the young scientists working in
her lab. Her legacy will be one of paying attention to the little effects in
an experiment; they can be as revealing or more revealing than the big
effects'.
Her humility, sense of humour, love of opera, egalitarian approach
to human interactions, and the pursuit of science are all hallmarks of
what she leaves behind.
He remains proud to have been a nephew to 'Aunt Trudy'-'a wonder woman', he said, 'that helped to form my approach to science, to
medicine, and to life'.
Conflict of interest: none declared.

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab299

Global spotlights

PCSK9 vaccine: so near, yet so far!
Amirhossein Sahebkar
Maciej Banach5*

1,2

*, Amir Abbas Momtazi-Borojeni3,4+, and

1
Biotechnology Research Center, Pharmaceutical Technology Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran; 2Applied Biomedical Research Center, Mashhad
University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran; 3Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Medicine, Alborz University of Medical Sciences, Karaj, Iran; 4Iran's National
Elites Foundation, Tehran, Iran; and 5Department of Hypertension, WAM University Hospital in Lodz, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland

Passive immunotherapy using monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) inhibiting
PCSK9, as a critical negative regulator of LDL receptor (LDLR), has
been a breakthrough in the field of lipid-lowering therapy during the
past decade. However, long-term clinical use of the mAbs is associated
with limitations such as short in vivo half-life, which necessitate frequent
administration and high cost, some tolerability problems, and possible
induction of host anti-mAbs. To circumvent such limitations, research
on active immunotherapy and vaccination approaches against PCSK9
has recently been flourished.
The fundamental feature of a PCSK9 vaccine is the capacity to trigger the generation of host anti-PCSK9 antibodies, which can properly
neutralize the PCSK9/LDLR interaction. Using a combination of the
AFFITOMEV strategy and nanoliposome platform technology, we have
R

recently designed a novel antiPCSK9 vaccine formulation, called
Liposomal Immunogenic Fused PCSK9-Tetanus peptide plus Alum adjuvant (L-IFPTA).1 The components of the L-IFPTA formulation have
been selected in a way that provide prerequisites for the safe and effective activation of the immune system. The main challenge for designing
a safe vaccine against self-antigens, such as PCSK9, is to effectively
break down B-cell tolerance, while avoiding activation of the destructive auto-reactive T-cell response. Hence, it is important during vaccine development to exclude peptide antigens that are able to induce
specific T-cell responses. However, B cells need aid from CD4th T
helper (Th) cells for efficient activation and differentiation into durable
plasma and memory cells. A strategy for inducing sufficient generation
of autoantibodies is to physically conjugate a B-cell epitope of

*Corresponding author. Tel: th985131801239, Email: sahebkara@mums.ac.ir (A.S.); Tel: 48604593040, Email: maciej.banach@icloud.com (M.B.)
This author contributed equally as first author.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/39/4007/6307069 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

clinical environment'; haematologist Dr Archie McKinney; and two
cardiologists at Duke University during his training-Clinical
Cardiologist Dr William Floyd, and Dr Joseph Greenfield (Chief of
Cardiology at the Veteran's Administration Hospital affiliated with
Duke) who mentored his research and showed him that 'the highest
standards established in the research laboratory could carry over
into the clinical setting'.
Today, Dr Elion is a Cardiologist and Clinical Associate Professor of
Medicine at Brown University, and part of the Cardiovascular Institute
at The Miriam Hospital and its parent organization, Lifespan, with a
continued interest in the transition to digital working and use of artificial intelligence in cardiology.
He met his wife Kathleen in 1974 during his CCU rotation when she
was a nurse, and they have a son Christopher and daughter Leigh.
Trudy Elion never married. She was engaged but her fiance Leonard
Canter became died of bacterial endocarditis in 1941.
'Trudy never talked about Leonard, although she did allude to his
existence', he said. 'I have a marvellous collection of correspondence
between Trudy and Leonard and a diary she kept. There is a fateful (to
me as a Cardiologist) letter from Leonard explaining that he did not
get a job due to a heart murmur. That turned out to be caused by the
heart infection that killed him'.
As an avid opera fan, Madame Butterfly was her favourite. Her
diary and a program from the New Year's Eve performance of

4008

CardioPulse

self-antigen to a foreign Th epitope. To this end, the L-IFPTA vaccine
contains two different epitopes belonging to PCSK9 and tetanus toxin
proteins. The PCSK9 fragment provides a B-cell epitope, which mimics
an N-terminal sequence responsible for PCSK9 bound to LDLR. The
amino acid sequence of the PCSK9 fragment was designed using
AFFITOMEV technology2,3 in a way that is different from the native sequence, which can be identified as foreign by the immune system and
thus overcome the self-tolerance. The PCSK9 fragment has a close
similarity between humans and rodents, thereby vaccine-generated
antibodies have the potential to block the PCSK9/LDLR interaction in
both species. To enhance the CD4th T-cell response, tetanus peptide
as a foreign Th epitope was coupled to the PCSK9 fragment. We indicated that the L-IFPTA vaccine can inhibit PCSK9-specific T-cell activation, while promoting tetanus-specific T-cell response that enhances
PCSK9-specific B-cell activation without safety concerns.1 Another important feature that can highly enhance the peptide immunogenicity to
R

induce effective antibody responses is antigen polyvalency. Polyvalent
antigens enable a better cross-linking of the B-cell receptors and robustly induce the proliferation of B cells and can even reverse the anergic phase of self-reactive B cells. Strong B-cell activation is
accompanied by elevated expression of molecules that permit successive connections with Th cells, causing the generation of memory and
plasma B cells that can persistently produce high-titre antibody
responses. Notably, we utilized nanoliposome particles as a carrier adjuvant to provide an antigen polyvalency decoration. Liposome nanoparticles are biodegradable and biocompatible bilayer vesicles that can
serve as a multivalent platform for antigen display. We demonstrated
that surface-displayed peptide nanoliposomes (L-IFPTA) elicited higher
and more durable titres of anti-PCSK9 antibody compared with the
peptide alone.1
Hitherto, the efficacy of L-IFPTA vaccine has been shown in different
animal models.1,4-10 The L-IFPTA vaccine induced the production of

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/39/4007/6307069 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 1 L-IFPTA vaccine in the preventive approach. Mice were immunized with the L-IFPTA vaccine four times in bi-weekly intervals. The
L-IFPTA vaccine induced long-term production of specific antiPCSK9 antibodies that could effectively inhibit PCSK9/LDLR interaction, thereby increasing the LDL receptor frequency on the surface of hepatocytes and consequently enhancing LDL-C uptake from the bloodstream. After the last
vaccination, mice were fed with an atherogenic diet for up to 16 weeks. At the end of the study, a reduced progression of atherosclerosis lesion was
observed in the aortic arch area in vaccinated mice compared with control mice. L-IFPTA, Liposomal Immunogenic Fused PCSK9-Tetanus peptide
plus Alum adjuvant; LDLR, LDL receptor.

CardioPulse

4009

functional anti-PCSK9 antibodies in BALB/c mice, which were both
safe and long-lasting (monitored by up to 1 year).1 Further investigation showed that immunization with the L-IFPTA vaccine could exert
long-lasting preventive (Figure 1) and therapeutic (Figure 2) effects
against hypercholesterolaemia and atherosclerosis in mice.4,5 Notably,
a significant negative correlation between anti-PCSK9 antibody titres
with serum levels of the free PCSK9 and LDL-C was observed. In a
study exploring the therapeutic efficacy of vaccine in C57BL/6 mice
with established hypercholesterolaemia and atherosclerosis, four
injections of vaccine caused reductions in total cholesterol (TC), LDLC, and very low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (VLDL-C) by up to
44.7%, 51.7%, and 19.2%, respectively. Long-term follow-up in the
same animals indicated a significant reduction of LDL-C by up to 42%
in vaccinated hypercholesterolaemic mice over 16 weeks post-prime
vaccination. Importantly, the L-IFPTA vaccine could ameliorate the severity of atherosclerosis lesions in hypercholesterolaemic mice; as 'intima to media thickness' and size of lesions were significantly reduced

by 46% and 39%, respectively.4 Similar to the therapeutic effect, we
demonstrated that the L-IFPTA vaccine could also exert a preventive
impact against hypercholesterolaemia and atheroma formation in
mice. Long-term monitoring showed that during 12 weeks after the
last vaccination shot, antibody titres in vaccinated mice remained significantly high, which was accompanied with up to 82.5% and 88.14%
reductions in serum levels of TC and LDL-C as well as smaller lesion
size (24%) in the aortic arch of vaccinated mice on a severe atherogenic diet.5 From a mechanistic standpoint, the L-IFPTA vaccine was
found to induce the generation of functional antibodies that could specifically target circulating PCSK9 and hinder its interaction with LDLR,
which resulted in enhanced expression of LDLR on the surface of hepatocytes and ensuing increase in cholesterol clearance from the
bloodstream.
Aside from its inherent atherogenic impact, hypercholesterolaemia
can promote systemic and vascular inflammation, which accelerate atherosclerotic lesion formation and instability. We showed that the L-

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/39/4007/6307069 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 2 L-IFPTA vaccine in the therapeutic approach. Mice were fed an atherogenic diet for 16 weeks. Hypercholesterolaemic mice bearing atherosclerosis lesions were then immunized with L-IFPTA vaccine four times in bi-weekly intervals. After the immunization period, atherosclerosis
lesions with moderate severity were observed in the vaccinated mice, while control mice suffered from severe atherosclerotic lesions. L-IFPTA,
Liposomal Immunogenic Fused PCSK9-Tetanus peptide plus Alum adjuvant.

4010

Conflict of interest: Maciej Banach has the followings to disclose:
speakers bureau: Amgen, Herbapol, Kogen, KRKA, Polpharma, Mylan/
Viatris, Novartis, Novo-Nordisk, Sanofi-Aventis, Teva, Zentiva; consultant to Abbott Vascular, Amgen, Daichii Sankyo, Esperion, Freia
Pharmaceuticals, Novartis, Polfarmex, Sanofi-Aventis; Grants from

Amgen, Mylan/Viatris, Sanofi and Valeant. Other authors have nothing
to disclose.

Data availability
There is no raw data associated with this article.

References
1. Momtazi-Borojeni AA, Jaafari MR, Badiee A, Sahebkar A. Long-term generation of
antiPCSK9 antibody using a nanoliposome-based vaccine delivery system.
Atherosclerosis 2019;283:69-78.
2. Galabova G, Brunner S, Winsauer G, Juno C, Wanko B, Mairhofer A, Luhrs P,
Schneeberger A, von Bonin A, Mattner F, Schmidt W, Staffler G. Peptide-based
anti-PCSK9 vaccines-an approach for long-term LDLc management. PLoS One
2014;9:e114469.
3. Schneeberger A, Mandler M, Otawa O, Zauner W, Mattner F, Schmidt W.
Development of AFFITOPE vaccines for Alzheimer's disease (AD)-from concept
to clinical testing. J Nutr Health Aging 2009;13:264-267.
4. Momtazi-Borojeni AA, Jaafari MR, Badiee A, Banach M, Sahebkar A. Therapeutic
effect of nanoliposomal PCSK9 vaccine in a mouse model of atherosclerosis. BMC
Med 2019;17:1-15.
5. Momtazi-Borojeni AA, Jaafari MR, Afshar M, Banach M, Sahebkar A. PCSK9 immunization using nanoliposomes: preventive efficacy against hypercholesterolemia and
atherosclerosis. Arch Med Sci 2021;17:
6. Momtazi-Borojeni A, Nik M, Jaafari M, Banach M, Sahebkar A. 4120 Anti-tumor activity of a nanoliposomal anti-PCSK9 vaccine in BALB/c mice bearing 4T1 breast
cancer. Eur Heart J 2019;40:ehz745.
7. Momtazi-Borojeni A, Nik M, Jaafari M, Banach M, Sahebkar A. P673 moderate antitumor effect of the nanoliposomal anti-PCSK9 vaccine in BALB/c mice bearing colorectal cancer. Eur Heart J 2019;40:ehz747.
8. Momtazi-Borojeni AA, Nik ME, Jaafari MR, Banach M, Sahebkar A. Potential antitumor effect of a nanoliposomal antiPCSK9 vaccine in mice bearing colorectal cancer. Arch Med Sci 2019;15:559-569.
9. Momtazi-Borojeni AA, Nik ME, Jaafari MR, Banach M, Sahebkar A. Effects of immunization against PCSK9 in an experimental model of breast cancer. Arch Med Sci
2019;15:570-579.
10. Momtazi-Borojeni AA, Nik ME, Jaafari MR, Banach M, Sahebkar A. Effects of
immunisation against PCSK9 in mice bearing melanoma. Arch Med Sci
2020;16:189-199.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/39/4007/6307069 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

IFPTA vaccine reduced the elevated levels of interferon (IFN)-c-producing T cells in hypercholesterolaemic mice. The pro-inflammatory
IFN-c cytokine can induce and worsen atherosclerosis progression via
inducing lipid accumulation and foam cell formation in the vascular wall
and affecting cellular composition of the plaque. In contrast, IL-4 and
IL-10 cytokines secreted by Th2 cells counteract the IFN-c production. A high level of Th2 cells in the circulating blood is independently
associated with a decrease in the carotid plaque thickness and a reduced risk of acute myocardial infarction. The L-IFPTA vaccine could
significantly increase the levels of Th2 cells and production of IL-4 and
IL-10 cytokines in the hypercholesterolaemic mice. The present findings can provide implications regarding the immunological safety of the
L-IFPTAth vaccine.
Altogether, the aforementioned findings support the potential of LIFPTA vaccine as a potent candidate for the management of dyslipidaemia and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (CVD). Nevertheless,
clinical data with L-IFPTA are still lacking until additional steps are
taken. We have just started the preclinical toxicity studies with LIFPTA to evaluate possible toxic effects of the vaccination on vital
organs. In parallel, the immune safety and efficiency of the vaccine in
eliciting anti-PCSK9 antibody response are being studied in non-human
primates. While the path to achieving an effective PCSK9 vaccine still
requires significant work, the extant preclinical evidence on the safety
and efficacy of the L-IFPTA formulation is encouraging to hold a promise for a phase I trial in near future.

CardioPulse


