European Heart Journal (2022) 43, 95-97
https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehab334

Global Spotlights

Andreas Zietzer

, Georg Nickenig, and Felix Jansen*

Heart Center, Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital Bonn, University of Bonn, Venusberg-Campus 1, Bonn 53127, Germany

If we have learned anything during the current COVID-19 pandemic, it
is the importance of effective delivery systems for messages and goods.
Social media, virtual meetings, and home-delivered food have helped
us endure the hardship of various stages of isolation and quarantine,
across Europe and the world. In our streets and cities, the available
delivery systems differ in their speed, volume, cargo security, and cost.
In our bodies, there are also a number of systems for the delivery of
information and cargo. Some are fast and goal-directed but also consume a lot of energy and are strictly hierarchical, such as the nervous
system. Others, such as extracellular vesicles (EVs), are open for use
by every cell, broad in potential applications, and 'inexpensive' but still
protective of their cargo.
EVs were first discovered to act as the workhorses of transport
in the body about the same time that Sting released his No. 1 hit
with the appropriate title 'message in a bottle'. Peter Wolf discovered what he called 'platelet dust', which could accelerate coagulation in vitro.1 Since then, considerable progress has been made in
the field and EVs have been shown to be involved in various pathological processes including inflammation, calcification and apoptosis.
EVs do not only transport by-products or 'waste' but are drivers
of the aforementioned processes and therefore interesting therapeutic targets.
When the cargo-delivery function of EVs was first discovered for
thrombosis and later for atherosclerotic disease,2 there was much
enthusiasm in the field. Understanding the mechanism by which
they work seemed to offer a 'field of gold' of new therapeutic
opportunities with the potential to re-'shape people's hearts'.
However, there are still no EV-based therapeutics, owing in part to
difficulties in manufacturing them, which are only now close to
being overcome.
Unlike small-molecule drugs, which are produced routinely, EVs are
complex biological structures that require a lipid membrane to encapsulate their cargo as well as specific proteins to mediate their uptake
into somatic cells. Therefore, the manufacturing process is

complicated and not easily scalable, but there seem to be two promising methods to begin producing large amounts of EVs (Figure 1).
First, proliferating human cells can be used to generate authentic
EVs. This requires bioreactors, where mostly mesenchymal stem cells
(MSC) are cultured for the production of EVs. While this method is
relatively costly, it has the advantage of producing authentic biologically
derived EVs, which are believed to be less immunogenic and more
effective for uptake and cargo delivery than the alternative approaches.
A second, promising method is the extraction of xenogenic EVs
from plants or whey, which can be used to deliver drugs as well as
siRNAs.3 The big advantage here is the low cost of production and the
large amount of EVs that can be produced. Therefore, less effective
uptake of these vesicles can be compensated for with a higher dose.
Furthermore, EV-like structures, called lipid nanoparticles, can be
manufactured synthetically. These are small, synthetic vesicles, which
are technically not EVs that can also be used to effectively transfer biomolecules into cells. An interesting example of this approach is the vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 from Biontech/Pfizer and Moderna, both of
which rely on the use of lipid nanoparticles to deliver mRNA. This procedure seems to be safe and adaptable to other, for example, cardiovascular applications. One of the many imaginable applications for this
approach is the local or systemic delivery of pro-regenerative RNAs in
lipid nanoparticles after an acute ischaemic event.
In spite of the current technical issues with EV manufacturing, cargo
manipulation, and uptake, there are currently >30 interventional studies registered on clinicaltrials.gov, which are evaluating EVs as therapeutic agents.
Most of these studies use EVs from mesenchymal stem cells, because
EVs are thought to be responsible for many of the beneficial effects of
stem cells without the drawbacks of uncontrolled proliferation and an
anti-cellular immune response. Systemic intravenous application of EVs
is being tested for multi-organ failure, type I diabetes mellitus, and lung
cancer, but there are also studies testing local administration of EVs for
peptic ulcers, colon cancer, or COVID-19 pneumonia.

* Corresponding author. Tel: th49 228 287 15217, Email: felix.jansen@ukb.uni-bonn.de
C The Author(s) 2021. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. V

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/2/95/6307070 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Small blebs, big potential - can extracellular
vesicles cure cardiovascular disease?

96

CardioPulse

In the cardiovascular field, pre-clinical trials with EVs have been performed now for more than a decade.4 Recently, the coating of stents
with EVs resulted in accelerated re-endothelialization and reduced instent re-stenosis compared to drug-eluting or bare-metal stents in
mice.5 This innovative approach gives cardiologists hope to overcome
the limitations of drug-eluting stents and has important clinical implications for patients with coronary artery disease.
Another highly interesting study will test the effect of intracoronary
applications of EVs after myocardial infarction (NCT04327635). Local
intracoronary administration may be particularly beneficial in an acute
setting, because it avoids two of the biggest problems of EV therapeutics: achieving a sufficiently high systemic concentration and assuring

that EVs are delivered to the site of interest. Furthermore, the effect of
EVs on organ dysfunction after surgical repair of Stanford A aortic dissections is currently being investigated. Here, the EVs will be applied
intravenously daily for 14 days (NCT04356300). In contrast to the
aforementioned study, this trial will therefore test the effectiveness of
systemic, repeated administration. These two studies are at the ends
of a wide spectrum of therapeutic EV approaches, ranging from targeted single use to repeated systemic administration (Table 1).
The good news is that the first interventional clinical trials with EVs
in the cardiovascular field have begun, attempting to deliver individualized cargo at a precise time and place, allowing cardiologists for the
first time to build a 'fortress around your heart'. In our opinion, this is a

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/2/95/6307070 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 1 Summary of current trends in extracellular vesicle therapeutics. (A) Origin and production of extracellular vesicles. (B) Single vs. repeated
and local vs. systemic administration. (C) Currently investigated cardiovascular and non-cardiovascular indications for extracellular vesicle
treatments.

97

CardioPulse

Table 1

Current clinical trials of extracellular vesicle-based therapeutics for cardiovascular diseases

Condition

Origin of EVs

Administration

NCT number

Study start

Multiple organ failure after surgi-

Exosomes from MSCs

150 mg i.v. 1/d for 14 days

NCT04356300

1 September 2020

Purified exosome product (PEP)

5%, 10%, or 20% PEP intracoro-

NCT04327635

26 April 2021

Autologous extracellular vesicles

nary 1 after PCI
Peri-wound injection 1/week

NCT04652531

18 September 2020

NCT03384433

17 April 2019

....................................................................................................................................................................................................................
cal repair of Stanford type A
aortic dissection
Acute myocardial infarction
Venous ulcer
Ischaemic stroke

Exosomes from MSCs after transfection with miR-124

development that merits close attention, because it can either lead to
the realization of potent new treatment options or to the rapid demise
of the rising star of EVs.

Acknowledgement
We would like to thank Meghan Lucas for her valuable suggestions.
Figure 1 includes Female shadow.png and Man shadow with organs.png by
Mikael HEURaggstrom and Cow cartoon 04.svg by LadyofHats all licensed
under CC0 and accessed via https://commons.wikimedia.org/.
Conflict of interest: none declared.

for 3 weeks
1, 1 month after stroke, via
stereotaxis/intraparenchymal

References
1. Wolf P. The nature and significance of platelet products in human plasma. Br J
Haematol 1967;13:269-288.
2. Hergenreider E, Heydt S, Treguer K, Boettger T, Horrevoets AJG, Zeiher AM,
Scheffer MP, Frangakis AS, Yin X, Mayr M, Braun T, Urbich C, Boon RA, Dimmeler
S. Atheroprotective communication between endothelial cells and smooth muscle
cells through miRNAs. Nat Cell Biol 2012;14:249-256.
3. Aqil F, Munagala R, Jeyabalan J, Agrawal AK, Kyakulaga A-H, Wilcher SA, Gupta RC.
Milk exosomes-natural nanoparticles for siRNA delivery. Cancer Lett
2019;449:186-195.
4. Jansen F, Nickenig G, Werner N. Extracellular vesicles in cardiovascular disease:
potential applications in diagnosis, prognosis, and epidemiology. Circ Res 2017;
120:1649-1657.
5. Hu S, Li Z, Shen D, et al. Exosome-eluting stents for vascular healing after ischaemic
injury. Nat Biomed Eng 2021;5:1174-1188. doi:10.1038/s41551-021-00705-0.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/2/95/6307070 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

from serum


