2810

(Council for At-Risk Academics) to fund places at UK universities for
young scientists forced to flee their homeland.
'I hope my father would have approved of it', concluded John. 'It is a
way of recognising what happened to him and reflecting that in the use
of the money from his Nobel Prize medal'.
Conflict of interest: none declared.

Medical Journalist
Mark Nicholls
MNmedia, Norfolk, UK
mark.nicholls@mnmedia.co.uk

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab135

The expert guide to becoming a cardiovascular
clinical trialist
Judith Ozkan BA Hons*
Faiez Zannad MD, PhD, of the Universite de Lorraine, France, has led numerous game-changing clinical trials into heart failure (HF). He talks to CardioPulse about why there's never
been a better time to become a trialist and how to find support and training

What route did you take to
becoming a clinical trialist?
In the 1990s, I came up with the idea of developing a specific medication for HF and it happened that a senior trialist Bertram Pitt, MD, at
the University of Michigan, in the USA had had the same idea. After we
talked, he was kind enough to invite me to join his steering committee,
which gave me experience and exposure and helped me progress.
Some people were lucky to have a mentor who was a major trialist
and who got them involved in secondary papers until they became visible and made their way up the ladder. There is no real identified way of
getting involved in clinical trials, it is often just serendipitous and needs
some persistence. Some fellows work at sites that do lots of trials and
they become involved in publishing secondary papers and become visible. However, you can also be a great physician and enrol lots of
patients in trials, and never end up on a steering committee. For many,
clinical trials are a closed world and we really need to open things up
and get senior trialists helping young fellows.

What does the Global Cardio
Vascular Clinical Trials Forum
(CVCT) do to support aspiring
trialists?
We started over 20 years ago with the main objective of organizing an
annual meeting. I am one of five directors. CVCT has grown into a real
community providing information, forums and contributions from
*Email: j.ozkan@btinternet.com

regulators, academics, industry, and others involved in clinical trials. It
is now based in Washington, DC, USA, and has a good relationship
with the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). CVCT has found that
most training programmes are orientated to areas such as interventional cardiology, clinical practice, and imaging, and there is much less
opportunity to find similar courses in clinical research and clinical trials.
We need to get young people interested in evidence generation and
clinical trials science, interpretation, and operational aspects. We need
to go beyond courses and programmes that are orientated to methodology, design, and statistics, to offer practical guidance and training that
is not covered elsewhere, so we came up with our own Young CVCT
initiatives, including a new internship and fellowship.

What are the new initiatives?
We have developed the 'career escalator' that takes place during our
annual meeting and involves matching young fellows interested in developing a career in clinical trials with major clinical trialists from academia and industry or from a regulatory background such as the FDA.
They typically spend half an hour chatting one-to-one about what they
should do in order to get into this area of science and this works well
even when we had a virtual meeting in 2020. Another thing is to allow
every speaker to nominate a fellow to attend the meeting for free. This
has benefitted around 50 fellows so far every year and all of them value
attending the meeting because it gives them a unique exposure to
stakeholders from various fields including industry, regulators, major
journal editors, academics, and investigators. We also have specific
courses at the meeting and practical master classes covering topics
such as interpreting trials, how to get your manuscript accepted by

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/29/2810/6177054 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Asked how he views Hans Krebs' legacy, he remarked that 'everybody who learns biology at school learned about the Krebs cycle' and
also recalls his father's style as a scientist as being 'absolutely persistent'
with a 'relentless focus'.
'I think that is what enabled him to make such an important discovery', he added.
John Krebs was instrumental in establishing the Sir Hans Krebs Trust
with proceeds from the sale of his father's Nobel medal at auction for
lb225 000.
His father had received donations-primarily from the Rockefeller
Foundation-to re-establish himself in England as a researcher after
leaving Germany. The trust, which he chairs, works with CARA

CardioPulse

CardioPulse

What about the YCVCT fellowship
and internship?
YCVCT stands for Young CardioVascular Clinical Trialist. We talked
to our industry partners who have seen the value of the work we do,
and we decided we needed to provide hands-on experience, which
was different to the sort of MSc programmes and courses you can find
at universities. We have a full-time, 1-year internship that is currently

funded by AstraZeneca and can be done in the UK, the USA, or in
Sweden. This is suited to a young fellow or someone at mid-career
level who wants to learn the technicalities of running a trial from concept and design, right up to the final stage of data analysis, interpreting
and disseminating the results of the trial. For the YCVCT fellowship,
candidates do not need to leave their institution or job. They are embedded as a junior member in one of the steering committees of a major ongoing trial and will attend all the meetings. They may have voting
rights either as a full steering committee member or will be participating in all the deliberations and the final publication as a mentee. The fellowship is based on merit but anyone less advanced in their career
would still be eligible for other programmes which offer a chance to
work on major trial databases. They can then produce
secondary manuscripts from trials, and this will help them understand
how a database is structured, how to do sophisticated analyses,
and then how to publish as a first author. The YCVCT fellowship
is supported by Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Cytokinetics. Full application details are available on our website, www.globalcvctforum.
com.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/29/2810/6177054 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

major journals, and how to apply for a National Institutes of Health
(NIH) grant. Medical writing training is also offered to fellows who attend the scientific sessions. They are encouraged to talk to the chair of
each session and to write a position paper as first author if they discover something new in the course of the discussion. These papers
have been published in high profile journals. Leading as first author on
papers co-authored with big name trialists is a unique learning experience and hopefully an extraordinary opportunity for anyone with
ambitions to become a trialist.

2811

2812

CardioPulse

Why is it important to attract new
and diverse talent into clinical trials?

What are the benefits of YCVCT
initiatives and how can the cardiology
community support them?

Conflict of interest: none declared.

Medical Journalist
Judy Ozkan BA, Hons
Edinburgh, Scotland
j.ozkan@btinternet.com

Although some of the initiatives, such as the CVCT fellowship and internship, are still very new, we have seen that the first two fellows are

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab353

Events and Meetings

ESC CONGRESS 2020-the digital experience:
expanding the reach of the society
Marco Roffi

1

*, Barbara Casadei

2

, and Silvia Priori3

1

University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland; 2University of Oxford, Oxford, UK; and 3Scientific Institute of Pavia, Istituti Clinici Scientifici Maugeri SpA, IRCCS, Pavia, Italy

In 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the annual congress of the
European Society of Cardiology (ESC)could not take place as an inperson event. The Digital Experience faced high expectations following
the 2019 ESC Congress in Paris, which was a record edition in terms
of attendance with 33 510 registrations. As a digital annual congress
was unchartered territory for the ESC, it was decided that free registration would be granted to all participants. Compared with the 2019
ESC Congress, The Digital Experience recorded a dramatic increase in
registrations, approaching four-fold (Figure). Equally impressive was the
approximately three-fold increase in the delegates who logged in during the congress as compared with the attendees in Paris. Country representation of registered individuals increased by 41%. Of particular
note, the proportion of delegates from South America rose from 7%
in 2019 to 19% in 2020 (Figure). The average age of delegates

*Corresponding author. Tel: th41 79 55 33 391, Email: marco.roffi@hcuge.ch

decreased from 49 years in 2019 to 41 years in 2020, while the proportion of delegates younger than 40 years of age went from 36% in 2019
to 53% in 2020. The proportion of female delegates increased from
33% in 2019 to 44% in 2020. The Digital Experience was able to attract
new audiences, with 62 007 of the registrants (50% of the total) being
'new' to the ESC. Overall, 'new contacts' originated from 195 countries/regions, the majority (56%) came from Central and South
America and 2/3 were under the age of 40 years. The proportion of
congress registrants in training or students more than doubled compared with the previous year (31% in 2020 vs. 12% in 2019).
Despite the constraints, The Digital Experience was able of offer over
85% of the total number of sessions available at ESC Congress 2019. In
addition, 3851 abstracts were presented, corresponding to over 90%
of previous year's offer. A total of 77 350 delegates logged in during

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/29/2810/6177054 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

We know that most principal investigators and academics who are involved in trials are ageing, white, and they are men. At our meetings,
we hear on a regular basis that the results of clinical trials can hardly be
implemented or applicable to all populations because few ethnic minority groups or women are involved in the trials as either patients or
investigators. Over the last 2 years, we have been promoting the diversity approach and we strongly encourage applications from diverse
ethnic groups as well as women. We are partnering with the FDA,
which believes that the best way to promote clinical trials that are applicable to all sections of the population is to be positive about diversity and recruit ethnic minority and female participants as patients and
trialists. We also support the Women-as-One network which enables
women in cardiology to promote themselves.

doing an excellent job and their publication record has improved substantially. We still have a long way to go, but we know there is a real
unmet need and large expectations. There are lots of possibilities for
development and future potential support not only from industry but
also hopefully from the NIH and the FDA who have an interest in ensuring cardiologists know about conducting trials as well as the regulatory process. We are only on the first page of a very ambitious
programme, and we need to get young fellows to apply and senior colleagues to nominate and support them. We find that successful candidates love the initiatives and bring their colleagues to meetings year on
year. We are a small-scale organization, but the YCVCT programme
enjoys support from the European Society of Cardiology (ESC),
American Heart Association (AHA), and American College of
Cardiology (ACC). Industry is also helping and what we need to do
now is to spread the word about the opportunities available.


