European Heart Journal (2021) 42, 2518-2526
doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab079

Global spotlights

Sebastian Neuber1,2,3+, Timo Z. Nazari-Shafti1,2,3+ Bramasta Nugraha4,5,
Volkmar Falk 1,2,3,6,7, and Maximilian Y. Emmert 1,2,3,7,8,9*
1
Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, German Heart Center Berlin, Berlin, Germany; 2German Centre for Cardiovascular Research, Partner Site Berlin, Berlin,
Germany; 3Berlin Institute of Health Center for Regenerative Therapies, Charite - UniversitEURatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany;; 4Institute of Parasitology, Laboratory of
Molecular Parasitology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; 5Bioscience Cardiovascular, Research and Early Development, Cardiovascular, Renal and Metabolism, R&D
BioPharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden; 6Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; 7Clinic for Cardiovascular Surgery,
Charite - UniversitEURatsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany; 8Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; and 9Wyss Zurich, University of Zurich and
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

Myocardial regeneration therapy-
lost in clinical translation?
The question of why the human heart only has a very limited innate capacity to regenerate after injuries have prompted numerous scientists
to investigate regenerative therapies for the heart. Despite extensive
studies, the cardiovascular disease after myocardial infarction is still
one of the main causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide. While
some human tissues heal with a functional scar after injury or disease,
that is, with replacement tissue that reiterates the functional properties
of the injured tissue, myocardial scars do not support heart function
(Figure 1). However, the fibrous scar in the heart is sufficient to maintain its structural integrity during exercise. This comes at a cost: contractility and, in some cases, myocardial excitation and conduction are
usually impaired. Most of the research over the past 20 years has focused on cell-based and cell-derived therapies to either prevent excessive scarring after injury or to regenerate remodelled and scarred
myocardial tissue. In preclinical trials with rat and mouse models of
myocardial injury, great advances have been made in restoring myocardial function using cell-based or tissue-engineered products. While
large animal models still showed favourable results, none of these
products resulted in a clinically meaningful therapy that could withstand regulatory hurdles and achieve successful regeneration of myocardial tissue. In addition to the lack of suitable cardiac progenitor cells
for heart repair, another issue is the regeneration of extracellular matrix (ECM), a complex and dynamic network of proteins that surrounds and interconnects cardiac cells, in the myocardium.

Furthermore, Taylor and colleagues have shown in decellularized
hearts that ECM can guide transplanted cells to form functionally beating myocardial tissue.1 Additional efforts must be made to study the regeneration of proper ECM in the myocardial scar and to determine
what formulation of cell and ECM composites are needed to form a
functional myocardial tissue that integrates into existing tissue.
However, a major limitation in the development and evaluation of
such products and the study of the mechanisms of cardiac remodelling
in humans is the lack of appropriate models.

Modelling the remodelling of the
human heart
Some lower vertebrates such as the zebrafish have remodelling programs that ultimately repair heart injuries with functional myocardial
tissue. However, this process is blocked in higher vertebrates such as
humans regardless of age. At the cellular level, it is known that there
are specific transcriptional and translational check points that prevent
de novo cardiopoiesis.2 However, the role of the ECM and its interaction with cardiac cells is not yet well understood. Although 99% of human genes have corresponding mouse orthologues, previous
experience with animal models has shown that results can only be applied to humans to a limited extent. There are significant anatomical
and physiological differences between the human heart and those of
animals, such as tissue structure, heart beat rate, and electrophysiological properties, which can become more obvious and limiting in

Corresponding author. Tel: 0049 30 4593 2030, Email: emmert@dhzb.de
+
These authors contributed equally to this work.
C The Author(s) 2021. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. V

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/26/2518/6270953 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

The link between regeneration and
extracellular matrix in the heart-can
three-dimensional in vitro models uncover it?

2519

Cardiopulse

Table 1

Advantages and disadvantages of traditional 2D cell culture, 3D in vitro models, and rodent in vivo models

Technique

Advantages

Disadvantages

2D cell culture (culture dish)

 Homogenous genetic population

 Static condition

 Controlled environment
 Well established methodology

 No cellular heterogeneity
 Lack of complex cell microenvironment

 High reproducibility

 Lack of 3D tissue architecture and complexity

 Cost-effective

 May not represent the in vivo phenotype

 In vivo-like complexity

 More complex culture system

 In vivo-like architecture

 Static condition

 Cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix interactions
 Sensitivity to drugs is similar to in vivo tissue

 Inefficient nutrient, waste, and gas exchange
 Difficult to standardize

 In vivo-like complexity

 Requirement of special equipment (pumps, tubes)

 In vivo-like architecture
 Fine control of the complex cell microenvironment

 Operational complexity
 Difficult to be adapted for high-throughput screening

....................................................................................................................................................................................................................

....................................................................................................................................................................................................................
3D cell culture (organoid)

....................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Microfluidic platform
(organoid-on-a-chip)

 Ability to integrate various sensors and actuators
 Good mass transport provided by fluid flow

....................................................................................................................................................................................................................
3D bioprinting

 Custom-made architecture

 Expensive equipment and materials

 High reproducibility

 Difficult to be adapted to high-throughput screening

 High precision
 High-throughput production
 Vascularization of the engineered tissue

....................................................................................................................................................................................................................
Animal model (rodent model)

 Readily available
 Ease of handling and housing

 Ethical concerns
 No representation of the human physiology

 Cost-effective

 Difficult to precisely model human diseases

 High reproduction rate

 Difficult to be adapted to high-throughput screening

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/26/2518/6270953 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 1 Myocardial remodelling and strategies for regeneration (created with BioRender.com).

2520

Cardiopulse

pathological conditions. It is therefore important that more research
be directed towards more complex tissue-engineered models that
meet the following criteria:
i. Modelling cell-to-cell interactions and maintaining tissue homeostasis
ii. Acceptance of ECM modifications to study their role in tissue healing
and homeostasis
iii. Mimicking of biomechanical and functional properties of myocardial
tissue
iv. Ability to study the integration of functional myocardial tissue into
existing tissue

Consequently, in vitro mimicking of the human heart with threedimensional (3D) models would be beneficial. Recent developments in
bioengineering organoids, organoid-on-a-chip platforms, and 3D bioprinting technologies could overcome some hurdles in modelling myocardial injury and cardiac remodelling and serve as a platform for
developing strategies for tissue regeneration on a cellular and ECM
level.3 The possibility to cultivate cardiac cells in a 3D microenvironment that reflects the situation in the native organ in vivo could improve
various biological studies that may not be performed directly in the human heart due to ethical issues and potential life-threatening complications. Table 1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of

traditional two-dimensional (2D) cell culture, in vitro 3D models, and
in vivo animal models (rodent).

Organoids, organoids-on-a-chip,
and 3D bioprinting-where do we
stand?
Organoids are self-organizing 3D structures derived from stem cells
that recapitulate essential aspects of tissue structure and function.4
These miniaturized organs have the ability to mimic human tissue and
organ architecture in terms of cell-to-cell and cell-to-matrix interactions, thereby exhibiting physiological organ functions and pathological conditions. Compared to animal models, organoids can be scaled
down for high-throughput testing at a lower cost with less ethical
concerns. In addition, organoid models can be utilized to study heart
diseases using experimental manipulations that are problematic or
even not feasible to be performed in vivo due to ethical or technical
hurdles. One of the greatest challenges being encountered in designing cardiac organoids is the heterogeneity of the different cell populations composing the heart tissue and the association of various

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/26/2518/6270953 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 2 Improved integrated data acquisition systems are needed to develop next-generation heart-on-a-chip models for more comprehensive
analysis of myocardial remodelling after heart injury, myocardial biomechanics, and response to treatment (created with BioRender.com).

2521

Cardiopulse

Let's go 3D!
The development of 3D cardiac tissue models that mimic heart
structure and physiology in vivo is revolutionizing our understanding
of disease mechanisms (Figure 1). Although many tools and reagents
are commercially available for creating and analysing 3D in vitro models, the technology is still rarely used in academic research laboratories or in industry. One of the possible reasons for this challenge is
that the standard 2D culture has been well established, and therefore it is more convenient to compare results from the previous
studies. In addition, 2D culture is highly accepted in the scientific
community, is probably more cost-effective, and more standardized.
However, 3D culture models are becoming increasingly popular for
modelling human diseases and testing therapeutics in vitro, especially
in terms of how large pharmaceutical companies perceive this technology for the long run. Furthermore, in contrast to 2D models, 3D
models could prove to be more conducive to investigate cell-toECM interactions. The ultimate goal is to achieve in vivo-like settings
that reflect the complex structure of ECM and various cell types in
myocardial tissue as well as the physiological function of the heart.
These models could also make it possible to refine strategies to improve on ECM production and formulations in order to maintain
cell transplants. Despite recent advances in 3D culture models, the
full potential has not yet been completely exploited, but hopefully
will further increase with more refined technical innovations. In
terms of data analysis of using 3D cell culture technologies, improved sensors, image analysis techniques, advanced microscopy and
imaging, machine learning and artificial intelligence capturing cellular
features in high throughput, and data acquisition methods have already lowered the hurdle to use 3D in vitro models as biological
tools. In the future, the combination of organoid platforms, microfluidics, and 3D bioprinting is foreseen to provide a highly anticipated
technology for developing next-generation in vitro heart models.
Continuous efforts are still required to ensure the accuracy and reproducibility of these models and to improve techniques required
for the automation purposes.
Conflict of interest: V.F. has relevant (institutional) financial activities outside the summited work with following commercial entities:
Medtronic GmbH, Biotronik SE & Co., Abbott GmbH & Co. KG,
Boston Scientific, Edwards Lifesciences, Berlin Heart, Novartis Pharma
GmbH, JOTEC GmbH and Zurich Heart in relation to educational
grants (including travel support), fees for lectures and speeches, fees
for professional consultation and research and study funds. B.N. is an
employee at AstraZeneca, Gothenburg, Sweden. M.Y.E. is a shareholder at LifeMatrix Technologies AG.

References
1. Ott HC, Matthiesen TS, Goh SK, Black LD, Kren SM, Netoff TI, Taylor DA.
Perfusion-decellularized matrix: using nature's platform to engineer a bioartificial
heart. Nat Med 2008;14:213-221.
2. Behfar A, Crespo-Diaz R, Terzic A, Gersh BJ. Cell therapy for cardiac repair - lessons from clinical trials. Nat Rev Cardiol 2014;11:232-246.
3. Matsa E, Burridge PW, Wu JC. Human stem cells for modeling heart disease and
for drug discovery. Sci. Transl. Med 2014;6:239ps6.
4. Clevers H. Modeling development and disease with organoids. Cell
2016;165:1586-1597.
5. Keung W, Chan PKW, Backeris PC, Lee EK, Wong N, Wong AOT, Wong GKY,
Chan CWY, Fermini B, Costa KD, Li RA. Human cardiac ventricular-like organoid
chambers and tissue strips from pluripotent stem cells as a two-tiered assay for
inotropic responses. Clin Pharmacol Ther US 2019;106:402-414.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/26/2518/6270953 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

diseases with specific cell types. On the technical level, organoid
technology has challenges of uniformity and reproducibility in terms
of size, shape, architecture, and cell composition. Another challenge
is the lack of vascularization in these complex structures, which
exposes organoids to necrosis and short lifetimes if not sub-cultured
once they reach a certain size or when the organoid dimension
exceeds the diffusion barrier. Manufacturing methods for cardiac
organoids were first published in 2007 and have made a significant
progress in recent years. For example, Keung et al.5 created human
ventricular-like cardiac organoid chambers from human embryonic
stem cells, Voges et al.6 established a human cardiac organoid injury
model to mimic myocardial infarction, and Ronaldson-Bouchard et
al.7 made functional cardiac tissue from pluripotent stem cells. Future
joint efforts from various scientific areas such as biology, pharmacology, toxicology, chemical engineering, and in silico modelling should
ideally be carried out to achieve an even stronger impact. Overall,
organoid technology can be considered one of the major technological breakthroughs of the past decade, as it possesses unique and
powerful properties to revolutionize traditional in vitro research tools
for modelling human heart development and diseases.
In addition, organoids-on-a-chip are engineered microfluidic systems that hold 3D tissues under precisely controlled conditions mimicking the complex structures and cellular interactions within and
between different cell types and tissues in vivo. With microfluidic
technology, tissue culture can be performed in a microenvironment
with optimized temperature, pH, nutrient and oxygen supply, and
waste removal. Sensors and actuators can be integrated into the
micro-engineered devices to enable online and real-time monitoring
and control of cellular processes.8 By optimizing several key parameters, such as the cell-to-cell contact, cell-type composition, tissue architecture, and nutrient exchange, batch-to-batch fluctuations can be
significantly minimized. Furthermore, improved integrated sensor
technology holds the promise of more comprehensive data acquisition (Figure 2). Although imitating the cardiovascular system is still
challenging due to its high dynamic nature such as blood flow, mechanical stretching, and electrical stimulation, heart-on-a-chip platforms have been successfully generated in previous years.9 This
development offers unprecedented opportunities to establish in vitro
models of human heart tissue that enable us to study the fundamental mechanisms of diseases, early drug discovery, safety assessment
and risk management of lead compounds, and then eventually the reduction and replacement of animal experiments.
Recently, 3D bioprinting has emerged as a promising technology that
combines both cells and biomaterials as printing materials to create geometrically defined functional living tissue constructs in three dimensions.10 Data for 3D bioprinted models can be obtained from 3D
scanners, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and ultrasound systems using appropriate software. Based on a high-precision
layer-by-layer building process, 3D bioprinting can be used to create a
complex tissue architecture with a spatio-temporal distribution of cells
and bioactive factors to accurately imitate native physiological niches and
complex tissue microenvironments. Bioprinting also enables the vascularization of the engineered tissue constructs, which offers additional versatility in the manufacture of vascularized organoids. Although the
bioprinting technology is still in its early stages, it has already been used
to create cardiovascular tissues. We believe that 3D bioprinting is a feasible approach to create a physiologically relevant and robust cardiac
model by reproducing in vivo tissue composition and complexity.

2522
6. Voges HK, Mills RJ, Elliott DA, Parton RG, Porrello ER, Hudson JE. Development
of a human cardiac organoid injury model reveals innate regenerative potential.
Dev Engl 2017;144:1118-1127.
7. Ronaldson-Bouchard K, Ma SP, Yeager K, Chen T, Song LJ, Sirabella D,
Morikawa K, Teles D, Yazawa M, Vunjak-Novakovic G. Advanced maturation of
human cardiac tissue grown from pluripotent stem cells. Nature 2018;
556:239-243.

Cardiopulse

8. Yin X, Mead BE, Safaee H, Langer R, Karp JM, Levy O. Engineering stem cell organoids. Cell Stem Cell 2016;18:25-38.
9. Kitsara M, Kontziampasis D, Agbulut O, Chen Y. Heart on a chip: micro-nanofabrication and microfluidics steering the future of cardiac tissue engineering.
Microelectron Eng 2019;203:44-62.
10. Murphy SV, Atala A. 3D bioprinting of tissues and organs. Nat Biotechnol US
2014;32:773-785.

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab039

Kamran Mahlooji1, Mahsima Abdoli2, Halil Tekiner3, and Arman Zargaran

1

*

1
Department of History of Medicine, School of Persian Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; 2Research Institute for Islamic and Complementary
Medicine, School of Persian Medicine, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; and 3Department of History of Medicine and Ethics, Erciyes University School of
Medicine, Kayseri, Turkey

The history of pulmonary circulation discovery has been long-time debated. For centuries, William Harvey (1578-1657) was reported as
the first scholar who described pulmonary circulation mechanism in
his book entitled De Motu Cordis (On the Motion of the Heart; 1628)1;
while, before him, the credit of this great anatomical discovery was
given to Michael Servetus (c.1511-1553). Servetus was a Spanish philosopher, theologian, and polymath hypothesizing pulmonary circulation in his book Christianismi Restitutio (Restoration of Christianity;
1553).2 After him, such a theory was further developed by the Italian
anatomist Renaldus Columbus (1516-1559), and finally elaborated
through a mechanistic approach by Harvey.1
Only after 1920s, it was revealed that Servetus had an access
to books authored by Ibn al-Nafis (1213-1288), the Syrian
physician who presented the lesser circulation by rejecting the previous theory of Avicenna (980-1032).3 Specifically, Avicenna speculated
the transferring of blood between left and right ventricles via small
pores in the septum between the ventricles. A theory derived from
that of Galen of Pergamon (c.129-c.200), the famous Greek
physician.4
Very recent studies show that the modern theory circulated among
some Persian scientists even before Ibn al-Nafis, indeed in his writings
Akhawayni (died 983) introduced both theories: pulmonary circulation
and pores in the septum.5 Even before, pulmonary circulation was
mentioned in Vazidegiha-i-Zadisparam, a Sassanid Pahlavic text, implying
that such a theory was known (and presumably originated) in the
Sassanid era (224-637) of ancient Persia.6 However, further studies
are needed to find the missing links up to the present.
We herein aim to present another historical evidence of pulmonary
circulation in a text that belongs to pre-Ibn-al-Nafis era. This text, attributed to Ibn Luqa (860-912), can be a significant reference for tracking the discovery of pulmonary circulation in the history of
cardiovascular system.
Qusta Ibn Luqa was born in Baalbek (modern-day in Lebanon) in
860 AD. Later, he emigrated to Baghdad, the capital of the Abbasid
Caliphate, and one of the centres of science in the era of the Islamic
Golden Age (9-13th century).7 Ibn Luqa was a respected physician,

*Corresponding author. Tel: +98 9122060881, Email: zargarana@sums.ac.ir

Figure 1 A painting of a class in 'Beit al-Hekmeh' of Baghdad; depiction by Yahya ibn Vaseti in the Maqama of Hariri (13th century), preserved in Bibliotheque nationale de France.

scientist, and translator. He translated non-Arabic texts into Arabic under the supervision of Hunain Ibn Ishaq, a notable Nestorian Christian
translator and physician in the House of Wisdom (Beit al-Hekmeh, an
early academy) in Baghdad (Figure 1).8 It seems that he had also close
relations with Iranians;9 and probably had access to ancient Persian
sources. Finally, Ibn Luqa left Baghdad to Armenia upon an invitation
from the Armenian king and died there in 912. As a prolific author and
translator, he wrote about 60 among books and manuscripts.10
In his Arabic books entitled On the Difference of Spirit and Soul
(Figure 2), Ibn Luqa discusses ruh (spirit) and nafs (soul) claiming that
they belong to medicine and philosophy, respectively. He expounds

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/26/2518/6270953 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

A new evidence on pulmonary circulation
discovery: A text of Ibn Luqa (860-912 AD)


