European Heart Journal (2022) 43, 174-176
https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehab742

Global Spotlights

David Carballo
Yvo Smulders

1

, Frank L. J. Visseren

2

*, Francois Mach

1

, and

3

1

Department of Cardiology, Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland; 2Department of Vascular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan,
Netherlands; and 3Department of Internal Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands

The 2021 ESC Guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice have now been published, updating the 2016 edition.1 The
publication of these guidelines coincides with a decrease in atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) mortality rates in Europe.
However, as stated in the introduction of these guidelines, CVD
remains a major cause of morbidity and mortality. The guidelines are
instrumental in reducing the burden of CVD by encouraging management strategies, both at the individual level and at the population level.
The cornerstone of the guidelines is the promotion of a healthy lifestyle and aggressive control of atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk factors. Several objectives were set out by the task force for these 2021
Guidelines on CVD prevention, amongst which were the aim to make
a single guideline for primary care as well as hospital care to support
clinical practice, introduce personalized management strategies with
more attention to CVD prevention in older persons, have more
patient involvement during the conception of the guidelines, as well as
promote shared decision-making, update risk prediction algorithms for
apparently healthy individuals, and finally identify potential cost-benefit
issues throughout the guidelines.2,3 A novel inclusion is the introduction of a stepwise approach to the risk factor treatment intensification,
proposed as a solution to the dilemma of achieving what some consider as challenging therapeutic goals.
Updating the risk prediction algorithms resulted in the inclusion of
the recently published SCORE2 and SCORE2-OP risk scores. These
novel risk scores are now calibrated for four geographic European
regions, and in an effort to further personalize management strategies,
there are now age-specific risk thresholds in the apparently healthy
population. A further novelty in these guidelines is the estimation of
lifetime CVD risk and treatment benefits, which are now proposed as
an option to engage in communication with patients, with specific benefit tables now provided as means for discussion.
The general structure of these 2021 Guidelines suggest initially classifying individuals into groups based on clinical characteristics. These
groups are the "apparently heathy people", patients with established
ASCVD, and those with specific risk conditions such as diabetes

mellitus, chronic kidney disease, or familial hypercholesterolemia.
CVD risk estimation using the novel risk scores is then moderated by
considering risk modifiers and comorbidities. Informed discussion
about CVD lifetime risk and treatment benefits tailored to individual
needs and preferences are then suggested before proposing personalized treatment decisions and setting individual level interventions and
treatment goals. Classification of individuals into risk categories, followed by a stepwise treatment-intensification approach, is one of the
novel strategies proposed. This approach to treatment intensification
is to be used as a tool to help physicians and patients pursue these targets in a way that fits patient profiles and preferences and in effect
reflects routine clinical practice, in which treatment strategies are initiated and then intensified in a shared decision-making process between
healthcare professionals and patients.
The central diagram (Figure 1) illustrates these new guidelines and
the management strategies that are promoted therein with specific
management strategies. Although the ultimate therapeutic goals
remain aligned with previously published ESC Guidelines specifically
with targets for LDL-cholesterol, blood pressure, and glycaemic control remaining as recommended in recent ESC Guidelines, the stepwise approach is believed to allow a modulated discussion with
patients and allow one to engage in rational shared decision-making
and perhaps crucially allowing for a greater proportion of people to
attain the scientifically proven beneficial treatment thresholds.
In the high-risk category of patients with established CVD, occasionally recurrent CVD risk is very high despite maximum tolerated conventional treatments. In such cases in step 2 of the flow chart 'novel
but less well-established preventive treatments such as dual antithrombotic pathway inhibition, icosapent ethyl, or anti-inflammatory therapy
with colchicine may now be considered'. This recommendation for the
use of anti-inflammatory therapy acknowledges evidence coming from
the CANTOS study providing proof of concept for anti-inflammatory
therapy in high-risk patients, and more recently the COLCOT and
LoDoCo2 trials, although the exact use of colchicine in everyday clinical practice remains to be established.

* Corresponding author. Tel: th31-88-7555161, Email: f.l.j.visseren@umcutrecht.nl
C The Author(s) 2021. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. V

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/3/174/6447113 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

The 'ten commandments' for the 2021 ESC
Guidelines on CVD prevention

175

CardioPulse

At the population level these guidelines renew with the previous
ones, with suggestions for policy interventions on physical activity, diet,
smoking and tobacco use and alcohol. Population level approaches to
CVD prevention centre around upstream measures requiring broad
public health interventions intended to shift population attributable
risk, and aim to alter the societal environment, modify certain social
determinants of health, and provide incentives to encourage changes
in individual behaviour and exposure to risk factors. These guidelines
have also introduced new risk considerations, such as air pollution and
climate change. Attention has now been drawn to environmental
exposures with CVD risk-modifying potential, including air and soil
pollution, above-threshold noise levels and the effects of climate
change. Furthermore, air pollution has been recognized as contributing
to mortality and morbidity, and specifically increasing the risk of CVD.

Climate change is also recognized as becoming a major public health
and environmental concern.

The 'ten commandments' for the
2021 ESC Guidelines on CVD
prevention
o Constitute a single guideline for primary care as well as hospital
care for CVD prevention to support clinical practice.

o The cornerstone of the guidelines is the promotion of a healthy lifestyle and the aggressive control of atherosclerotic cardiovascular
risk factors.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/3/174/6447113 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 1 Central diagram illustrating management strategies.

176

CardioPulse

o Classification of individuals into risk groups based on their clinical

o Attention drawn to environmental exposures with CVD risk-modi-

characteristics followed by a stepwise treatment-intensification
approach.
Integration of patient profiles and preferences to reflect routine clinical practice in a shared decision-making process between healthcare professionals and patients.
Updated risk prediction algorithms for apparently healthy individuals, SCORE2 and SCORE2-OP risk scores, calibrated for four geographic European regions.
Age-specific risk thresholds in apparently healthy people, personalized management strategies with more attention to CVD prevention in older persons
Estimation of 10-year and lifetime CVD risk and estimation of lifetime treatment benefits to guide intensification of risk factor
treatment.
Targets and goals for LDL-cholesterol, blood pressure, and
glycaemic control remaining as recommended in the previous
guidelines.

fying potential, including air and soil pollution, above-threshold
noise levels, and the effects of climate change; air pollution is now
recognized as contributing to mortality and morbidity and increasing the risk of CVD. Climate change is also recognized as becoming
a major public health and environmental concern.
o Potential cost-benefit issues highlighted throughout the guidelines.

o
o
o

o

References
1. Visseren FLJ, Mach F, Smulders YM et al 2021 ESC Guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice. Eur Heart J 2021.;42:3227-3337.
2. SCORE2 working group; ESC Cardiovascular risk collaboration. SCORE2 risk prediction algorithms: new models to estimate 10-year risk of cardiovascular disease in
Europe. Eur Heart J 2021;42:2439-2454.
3. SCORE2-OP working group; ESC Cardiovascular risk collaboration. SCORE2-OP
risk prediction algorithms: estimating incident cardiovascular event risk in older persons in four geographical risk regions. Eur Heart J 2021;42:2455-2467.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/43/3/174/6447113 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

o

Conflict of interest: none declared.


