3116
This is the promise of digital health. With its unique position in the
palette of medical specialties, cardiology could be a leading example
paving the road for others in how to adopt advanced technologies
while focusing on the real-life relationships they can build with patients
through compassionate care.
Conflict of interest: none declared.

Cardiopulse

References
1. Mesk
o B, Drobni Z, Benyei 
E, Gergely B, Gy}
orffy Z. Digital health is a cultural transformation of traditional healthcare. mHealth 2017;3:38-38.
2. Sust PP, Solans O, Fajardo JC, Peralta MM, Rodenas P, Gabalda J, et alet al Turning
the crisis into an opportunity: digital health strategies deployed during the COVID19 outbreak. J Med Internet Res 2020;22.
3. Benjamens S, Dhunnoo P, Mesk
o B. The state of artificial intelligence-based FDA-approved medical devices and algorithms: an online database. NPJ Digit Med
2020;3:1-8.

The need for ethical and pragmatic strategies
for sample and data collection during public
health emergencies-minimizing missed
opportunities
Rafael Escandon1 and Bettina Heidecker

2

*

1

BridgeBio Gene Therapy, San Francisco, CA, USA; and 2Campus Benjamin Franklin, Charite UniversitEURatsmedizin Berlin, Hindenburgdamm 30, 12203 Berlin, Germany

What the COVID-19 pandemic has
revealed to clinical researchers

Lost samples during the first peak
of the COVID-19 pandemic

The magnitude of the success in vaccine and countermeasure research
to address the pandemic of SARS-CoV-2 in 2020 cannot be overstated.1 Within a short period of time, the international community
teamed up to address one of the greatest challenges in history, leading
to unprecedented achievements such as 'Project Lightspeed',2,3 in
which a highly efficient vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 was developed
within months. In parallel, other investigators and companies developed with great efficiency successful vaccines and therapies against
SARS-CoV-2, trying to meet the high demand for protection of our society and for return to 'normal' life.4,5
While these great successes received extensive media coverage,
other scientists have faced challenges due to delayed institutional
approvals of their COVID-19 research projects.
Certainly, the role of the ethics committee in ensuring the balance
between scientific progress and the protection of patients' rights, privacy, and clinical care is of utmost importance. While the review of a
research project application by an ethics committee frequently takes
several months during 'normal times', this delay may lead to avoidable
loss of valuable samples and data during an outbreak of a pandemic.
Time is of the essence for the research community during a pandemic
as scientists race to elucidate the pathophysiology of the disease and
provide guidance to those designing potentially lifesaving public policies. A new pragmatic balance between regulation and productivity in
science must be found in such scenarios.
In this article, we suggest a two-step consent algorithm, in which we
separate the institutional approval process for sample acquisition from
the approval process of sample analysis, allowing sample collection to
start immediately during an outbreak of a public health emergency.

Our motivation for writing this article arose from anecdotal evidence
of missed opportunities during the first peak of the COVID-19 pandemic observed by our international colleagues and by ourselves. In
this small-scale collection of data, we found that, on average, 70% of
COVID-19 minimal-risk biosamples such as blood or plasma could not
be collected during the first wave of the pandemic and were therefore
lost due to delays in approvals across many institutions. These delays
were caused by an overwhelming number of applications to the ethics
committees by investigators aiming to study COVID-19.6 The lost
samples could have potentially provided insights into the pathophysiologic mechanisms of COVID-19 in spring 2020 to better prepare the
public and clinical facilities for the second peak in autumn 2020.
The increased volume of applications required institutions to adjust
their review and approval practices.6 While ethical decisions on investigational trials are complex and require a comprehensive and often
lengthy review, we suggest a simple and time-efficient approach during
a public health crisis for studies that are solely analytical.
Early analytical and observational studies are highly relevant as they
seek to generate a better understanding of the pathophysiology of a
novel disease such as COVID-19 and to improve diagnosis and risk assessment.6 In that regard, relevant discoveries had been made in analytical studies concerning the nature of COVID-19, active viral
replication of SARS-CoV-2 in the respiratory tract, and how this affects
infectivity of patients during the course of the illness.7 Those findings
had a relevant impact on public health procedures.
Given the importance of analytical studies, the low health risk they
pose to patients, and the observed delays in their approval process, we
suggest a two-step consent process that separates sample collection

*Corresponding author. Tel: th49 30 450 513 736, Fax: th49 30 450 513 999, Email: bettina.heidecker@charite.de

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/33/3114/6157423 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehab102

3117

Cardiopulse

and sample processing, enabling sample collection immediately from
the start of the outbreak.

Proposal for two-step consent
process and exploratory sample
collection
We suggest a rapid, simple, independent ethics committee (IEC) approved, two-step process to consent for collection of biosamples that
involve minimal risk to the donor.

Step 1 obtains a consent limited to collection, proper storage, description of the level of personal identifiability, and process for withdrawing consent for donated routine bio-samples such as (blood,
plasma, sputum, and urine) until the public health emergency eases.
This consent must be approved a priori by the local ethics committee
for general health emergencies and may be applied anytime an outbreak such as the current pandemic occurs without requiring an additional approval process. This allows storage of samples right from the
start of an outbreak and commits the investigator to proper stewardship of the biosamples.
Step 2 of consent is approved as part of the application for a specific
analytical analysis, which is submitted to the IECs at a time when the

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/33/3114/6157423 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

Figure 1 Proposed 2-step consent process for collection of bio-samples in public health emergencies.

3118

Cardiopulse

5.

Conflict of interest: B.H. has received speaker's fees from Pfizer.

Corresponding author
Bettina Heidecker MD
Hindenburgdamm 30
12203 Berlin, Germany
bettina.heidecker@charite.de

References
1. Ball P. The lightning-fast quest for COVID-19 vaccines and what that means for
other disease. Nature 2021;589:16-18.
2. Sahin U, Muik A, Derhovanessian E, Vogler I, Kranz LM, Vormehr M, Baum A, Pascal
K, Quandt J, Maurus D, Brachtendorf S, Lorks V, Sikorski J, Hilker R, Becker D, Eller
A-K, Grutzner J, Boesler C, Rosenbaum C, Kuhnle M-C, Luxemburger U, KemmerBruck A, Langer D, Bexon M, Bolte S, Karik
o K, Palanche T, Fischer B, Schultz A,
Shi P-Y, Fontes-Garfias C, Perez JL, Swanson KA, Loschko J, Scully IL, Cutler M,
EUR COVIDKalina W, Kyratsous CA, Cooper D, Dormitzer PR, Jansen KU, Tureci O.
19 vaccine BNT162b1 elicits human antibody and TH1 T cell responses. Nature
2020;586:594-599.
3. Mulligan MJ, Lyke KE, Kitchin N, Absalon J, Gurtman A, Lockhart S, Neuzil K, Raabe
V, Bailey R, Swanson KA, Li P, Koury K, Kalina W, Cooper D, Fontes-Garfias C, Shi
EUR Tompkins KR, Walsh EE, Frenck R, Falsey AR, Dormitzer PR,
P-Y, Tureci O,
Gruber WC, Sahin U, Jansen KU. Phase I/II study of COVID-19 RNA vaccine
BNT162b1 in adults. Nature 2020;586:589-593.
4. Jackson LA, Anderson EJ, Rouphael NG, Roberts PC, Makhene M, Coler RN,
McCullough MP, Chappell JD, Denison MR, Stevens LJ, Pruijssers AJ, McDermott A,
Flach B, Doria-Rose NA, Corbett KS, Morabito KM, O'Dell S, Schmidt SD, Swanson
PA, Padilla M, Mascola JR, Neuzil KM, Bennett H, Sun W, Peters E, Makowski M,

6.

7.

8.

9.

Albert J, Cross K, Buchanan W, Pikaart-Tautges R, Ledgerwood JE, Graham BS,
Beigel JH. An mRNA vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 - preliminary report. N Engl J Med
2020;383:1920-1931.
Folegatti PM, Ewer KJ, Aley PK, Angus B, Becker S, Belij-Rammerstorfer S, Bellamy
D, Bibi S, Bittaye M, Clutterbuck EA, Dold C, Faust SN, Finn A, Flaxman AL, Hallis
B, Heath P, Jenkin D, Lazarus R, Makinson R, Minassian AM, Pollock KM, Ramasamy
M, Robinson H, Snape M, Tarrant R, Voysey M, Green C, Douglas AD, Hill AVS,
Lambe T, Gilbert SC, Pollard AJ, Aboagye J, Adams K, Ali A, Allen E, Allison JL,
Anslow R, Arbe-Barnes EH, Babbage G, Baillie K, Baker M, Baker N, Baker P,
Baleanu I, Ballaminut J, Barnes E, Barrett J, Bates L, Batten A, Beadon K, Beckley R,
Berrie E, Berry L, Beveridge A, Bewley KR, Bijker EM, Bingham T, Blackwell L,
Blundell CL, Bolam E, Boland E, Borthwick N, Bower T, Boyd A, Brenner T, Bright
PD, Brown-O'Sullivan C, Brunt E, Burbage J, Burge S, Buttigieg KR, Byard N, Cabera
Puig I, Calvert A, Camara S, Cao M, Cappuccini F, Carr M, Carroll MW, Carter V,
Cathie K, Challis RJ, Charlton S, Chelysheva I, Cho J-S, Cicconi P, Cifuentes L, Clark
H, Clark E, Cole T, Colin-Jones R, Conlon CP, Cook A, Coombes NS, Cooper R,
Cosgrove CA, Coy K, Crocker WEM, Cunningham CJ, Damratoski BE, Dando L,
Datoo MS, Davies H, De Graaf H, Demissie T, Di Maso C, Dietrich I, Dong T,
Donnellan FR, Douglas N, Downing C, Drake J, Drake-Brockman R, Drury RE,
Dunachie SJ, Edwards NJ, Edwards FDL, Edwards CJ, Elias SC, Elmore MJ, Emary
KRW, English MR, Fagerbrink S, Felle S, Feng S, Field S, Fixmer C, Fletcher C, Ford
KJ, Fowler J, Fox P, Francis E, Frater J, Furze J, Fuskova M, Galiza E, Gbesemete D,
Gilbride C, Godwin K, Gorini G, Goulston L, Grabau C, Gracie L, Gray Z, Guthrie
LB, Hackett M, Halwe S, Hamilton E, Hamlyn J, Hanumunthadu B, Harding I, Harris
SA, Harris A, Harrison D, Harrison C, Hart TC, Haskell L, Hawkins S, Head I,
Henry JA, Hill J, Hodgson SHC, Hou MM, Howe E, Howell N, Hutlin C, Ikram S,
Isitt C, Iveson P, Jackson S, Jackson F, James SW, Jenkins M, Jones E, Jones K, Jones
CE, Jones B, Kailath R, Karampatsas K, Keen J, Kelly S, Kelly D, Kerr D, Kerridge S,
Khan L, Khan U, Killen A, Kinch J, King TB, King L, King J, Kingham-Page L,
Klenerman P, Knapper F, Knight JC, Knott D, Koleva S, Kupke A, Larkworthy CW,
Larwood JPJ, Laskey A, Lawrie AM, Lee A, Ngan Lee KY, Lees EA, Legge H, Lelliott
A, Lemm N-M, Lias AM, Linder A, Lipworth S, Liu X, Liu S, Lopez Ramon R, Lwin
M, Mabesa F, Madhavan M, Mallett G, Mansatta K, Marcal I, Marinou S, Marlow E,
Marshall JL, Martin J, McEwan J, McInroy L, Meddaugh G, Mentzer AJ, Mirtorabi N,
Moore M, Moran E, Morey E, Morgan V, Morris SJ, Morrison H, Morshead G,
Morter R, Mujadidi YF, Muller J, Munera-Huertas T, Munro C, Munro A, Murphy S,
Munster VJ, Mweu P, Noe A, Nugent FL, Nuthall E, O'Brien K, O'Connor D, Oguti
B, Oliver JL, Oliveira C, O'Reilly PJ, Osborn M, Osborne P, Owen C, Owens D,
Owino N, Pacurar M, Parker K, Parracho H, Patrick-Smith M, Payne V, Pearce J,
Peng Y, Peralta Alvarez MP, Perring J, Pfafferott K, Pipini D, Plested E, Pluess-Hall H,
Pollock K, Poulton I, Presland L, Provstgaard-Morys S, Pulido D, Radia K, Ramos
Lopez F, Rand J, Ratcliffe H, Rawlinson T, Rhead S, Riddell A, Ritchie AJ, Roberts H,
Robson J, Roche S, Rohde C, Rollier CS, Romani R, Rudiansyah I, Saich S, Sajjad S,
Salvador S, Sanchez Riera L, Sanders H, Sanders K, Sapaun S, Sayce C, Schofield E,
Screaton G, Selby B, Semple C, Sharpe HR, Shaik I, Shea A, Shelton H, Silk S, SilvaReyes L, Skelly DT, Smee H, Smith CC, Smith DJ, Song R, Spencer AJ, Stafford E,
Steele A, Stefanova E, Stockdale L, Szigeti A, Tahiri-Alaoui A, Tait M, Talbot H,
Tanner R, Taylor IJ, Taylor V, Te Water Naude R, Thakur N, Themistocleous Y,
Themistocleous A, Thomas M, Thomas TM, Thompson A, Thomson-Hill S, Tomlins
J, Tonks S, Towner J, Tran N, Tree JA, Truby A, Turkentine K, Turner C, Turner N,
Turner S, Tuthill T, Ulaszewska M, Varughese R, Van Doremalen N, Veighey K,
Verheul MK, Vichos I, Vitale E, Walker L, Watson MEE, Welham B, Wheat J, White
C, White R, Worth AT, Wright D, Wright S, Yao XL, Yau Y. Safety and immunogenicity of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine against SARS-CoV-2: a preliminary report
of a phase 1/2, single-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2020;396:467-478.
Gulick RM, Sobieszczyk ME, Landry DW, Hollenberg AN. Prioritizing clinical research studies during the COVID-19 pandemic: lessons from New York City. J Clin
Investig 2020;130:4522-4524.
Wolfel R, Corman VM, Guggemos W, Seilmaier M, Zange S, Muller MA, Niemeyer
D, Jones TC, Vollmar P, Rothe C, Hoelscher M, Bleicker T, Brunink S, Schneider J,
Ehmann R, Zwirglmaier K, Drosten C, Wendtner C. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019. Nature 2020;581:465-469.
Grady C, Eckstein L, Berkman B, Brock D, Cook-Deegan R, Fullerton SM, Greely H,
Hansson MG, Hull S, Kim S, Lo B, Pentz R, Rodriguez L, Weil C, Wilfond BS,
Wendler D. Broad consent for research with biological samples: workshop conclusions. Am J Bioeth 2015;15:34-42.
Goldenberg AJ, Maschke KJ, Joffe S, Botkin JR, Rothwell E, Murray TH, Anderson R,
Deming N, Rosenthal BF, Rivera SM. IRB practices and policies regarding the secondary research use of biospecimens. BMC Med Ethics 2015;16:32.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/42/33/3114/6157423 by Stanford Libraries user on 28 April 2022

system is less acutely burdened. After approval by the IECs, the Step 2
consent is collected retrospectively from patients whose samples have
already been stored and includes more specific details of research objectives and the analyses to be done on their samples. Step 2 consent may
be a broad consent, but it must contain adequate details on present and
future analyses, storage, data sharing, and rights to discontinue use.8,9 If a
patient died between Steps 1 and 2, the Step 2 consent is sought from
the nearest family member. If the analyses involve genetic testing, local
regulations have to be taken into consideration. If proper consent at
Step 2 cannot be obtained, samples are destroyed (Figure 1).
With the algorithm of a two-step consent, we would like to offer
guidance to institutions who may have experienced similar barriers
during the outbreak of the pandemic, when rapid data and sample collection was most needed to obtain insights into this novel disease.
Clinical Scientists/Investigators have a(n ethical) responsibility to
pursue research which may urgently reduce morbidity and mortality,
as well as to be diligent stewards of their ongoing research projects involving human subjects, even during public health emergencies. Any
process which slows, halts or handicaps valid and ethical scientific research, affects research utility and integrity. Likewise, academic, public,
and private institutions have a similar responsibility to create a policy
and offer guidance to investigators on the benefits and risks of approving new, continuing, suspending, or terminating existing research projects during public health emergencies.
With our suggested algorithm, we hope that in the future similar
clinical scenarios can be addressed more promptly so that the entire
scientific community will be able to address these challenges from Day
1 of the outbreak.


